[Source: 附件\anx04en200408_en.pdf]
[Format: EU GMP Regulation]

ANNEX 4
MANUFACTURE OF VETERINARY MEDICINAL PRODUCTS
OTHER THAN IMMUNOLOGICAL VETERINARY MEDICINAL
PRODUCTS
Note
This annex applies to all veterinary medicinal products falling within the scope of Directive
2001/82/EC other than immunological veterinary medicinal products, which are the subject of a
separate annex.
Manufacture of premixes for medicated feedingstuffs
For the purposes of these paragraphs,
— 	a medicated feedingstuff is any mixture of a veterinary medicinal product or products and feed
or feeds which is ready prepared for marketing and intended to be fed to animals without further
processing because of its curative or preventative properties or other properties as a medicinal
product covered by Article 1 (2) of Directive 2001/82/EC;
— 	a pre-mix for medicated feedingstuffs is any veterinary medicinal product prepared in advance
with a view to the subsequent manufacture of medicated feedingstuffs.
1. 	The manufacture of premixes for medicated feedingstuffs requires the use of large quantities of
vegetable matter which is likely to attract insects and rodents. Premises should be designed,
equipped and operated to minimise this risk (point 3.4.) and should also be subject to a regular
pest control programme.
2. 	Because of the large volume of dust generated during the production of bulk material for
premixes, specific attention should be given to the need to avoid cross contamination and
facilitate cleaning (point 3.14), for example through the installation of sealed transport systems
and dust extraction, whenever possible. The installation of such systems does not, however,
eliminate the need for regular cleaning of production areas.
3. 	Parts of the process likely to have a significant adverse influence on the stability of the active
ingredient(s) (e.g. use of steam in pellet manufacture) should be carried out in an uniform
manner from batch to batch.
4. 	Consideration should be given to undertake the manufacture of premixes in dedicated areas
which, if at all possible, do not form part of a main manufacturing plant. Alternatively, such
dedicated areas should be surrounded by a buffer zone in order to minimise the risk of
contamination of other manufacturing areas.

-- 1 of 2 --

Manufacture of ectoparasiticides
5. 	In derogation from point 3.6, ectoparasiticides for external application to animals, which are
veterinary medicinal products, and subject to marketing authorisation, may be produced and
filled on a campaign basis in pesticide specific areas. However other categories of veterinary
medicinal products should not be produced in such areas.
6. 	Adequate validated cleaning procedures should be employed to prevent cross contamination,
and steps should be taken to ensure the secure storage of the veterinary medicinal product in
accordance with the guide.
Manufacture of veterinary medicinal products containing
penicillins
7. 	The use of penicillins in veterinary medicine does not present the same risks of hypersensitivity
in animals as in humans. Although incidents of hypersensitivity have been recorded in horses
and dogs, there are other materials which are toxic to certain species, e.g. the ionophore
antibiotics in horses. Although desirable, the requirements that such products be manufactured
in dedicated, self-contained facilities (point 3.6) may be dispensed with in the case of facilities
dedicated to the manufacture of veterinary medicinal products only. However, all necessary
measures should be taken to avoid cross contamination and any risk to operator safety in
accordance with the guide. In such circumstances, penicillin-containing products should be
manufactured on a campaign basis and should be followed by appropriate, validated
decontamination and cleaning procedures.
Retention of samples (point 1.4 viii and point 6.14)
8. 	It is recognised that because of the large volume of certain veterinary medicinal products in their
final packaging, in particular premixes, it may not be feasible for manufacturers to retain
samples from each batch in its final packaging. However, manufacturers should ensure that
sufficient representative samples of each batch are retained and stored in accordance with the
guide.
9. 	In all cases, the container used for storage should be composed of the same material as the
market primary container in which the product is marketed.
Sterile veterinary medicinal products
10. 	Where this has been accepted by the competent authorities, terminally sterilised veterinary
medicinal products may be manufactured in a clean area of a lower grade than the grade
required in the annex on “Sterile preparations”, but at least in a grade D environment.

-- 2 of 2 --

