[Source: 附件\annex14_rev30-03_2011_en.pdf]
[Format: EU GMP Regulation]

1
EUROPEAN COMMISSION
HEALTH AND CONSUMERS DIRECTORATE-GENERAL
Public Health and Risk Assessment
Pharmaceuticals
Brussels,
SANCO/C8/AM/an D(2010) 380358
EudraLex
The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union
Volume 4
EU Guidelines for
Good Manufacturing Practice for
Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use
Annex 14
Manufacture of Medicinal Products Derived from Human Blood or Plasma
Legal basis for publishing the detailed guidelines: Article 47 of Directive 2001/83/EC on
the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use and Article 51 of Directive
2001/82/EC on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products. This document
provides guidance for the interpretation of the principles and guidelines of good
manufacturing practice (GMP) for medicinal products as laid down in Directive 2003/94/EC
for medicinal products for human use and Directive 91/412/EEC for veterinary use.
Status of the document: revision 1
Reasons for changes: 	the Annex has been revised in the light of Directive 2002/98/EC and
relevant implementing directives setting standards of quality and safety for the collection and
testing of human blood and blood components for all uses, including the manufacture of medicinal
products.
Deadline for coming into operation: 30 November 2011
Commission Européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel – Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11

-- 1 of 13 --

2
Manufacture of medicinal products derived from human blood or plasma
Contents
Glossary
1. 	Scope
2. 	Principles
3. 	Quality Management
4. 	Traceability and Post Collection Measures
5. 	Premises and equipment
6. 	Manufacturing
7. 	Quality Control
8. 	Release of intermediate and finished products
9. 	Retention of plasma pool samples
10. Disposal of waste
Glossary
Blood
Blood, as referred to in Directive 2002/98/EC (Art. 3a), means whole blood collected from a
donor and processed either for transfusion or for further manufacturing.
Blood component
A blood component, as referred to in Directive 2002/98/EC (Art. 3b), means a therapeutic
constituent of blood (red cells, white cells, platelets and plasma) that can be prepared by various
methods.
Blood establishment
A blood establishment, as referred to in Directive 2002/98/EC (Art. 3e), is any structure or body
that is responsible for any aspect of the collection and testing of human blood and blood
components, whatever their intended purpose, and their processing, storage and distribution when
intended for transfusion. While this definition does not include hospital blood banks, it is
understood to include centres where apheresis of plasma is performed.
Blood products
A blood product, as referred to in Directive 2002/98/EC (Art. 3c), means any therapeutic product
derived from human blood or plasma.
Fractionation, fractionation plant
Fractionation is the manufacturing process in a plant (fractionation plant) during which plasma
components are separated/purified by various physical and chemical methods such as 	e.g.
precipitation, chromatography.

-- 2 of 13 --

3
Good Practice guidelines
Good practice guidelines give interpretation on the Community standards and specifications
defined for quality systems in blood establishments established in the Annex of Directive
2005/62/EC.
1
Medicinal products derived from human blood or human plasma
Medicinal products derived from human blood or human plasma, as referred to in Directive
2001/83/EC (Art. 1 No. 10), are medicinal products based on blood constituents which are
prepared industrially by public or private establishments.
Plasma for fractionation
Plasma for fractionation is the liquid part of human blood remaining after separation of the
cellular elements from blood collected in a container containing an anticoagulant, or separated by
continuous filtration or centrifugation of anti-coagulated blood in an apheresis procedure; it is
intended for the manufacture of plasma derived medicinal products, in particular albumin,
coagulation factors and immunoglobulins of human origin and specified in the European
Pharmacopoeia (Ph. Eur.) monograph “Human Plasma for fractionation” (0853).
Plasma Master File (PMF)
A Plasma Master File, as referred to in Directive 2001/83/EC (Annex I, Part III, No. 1.1.a), is a
stand-alone document, which is separate from the dossier for marketing authorisation. It provides
all relevant detailed information on the characteristics of the entire human plasma used as a
starting material and/or a raw material for the manufacture of sub/intermediate fractions,
constituents of the excipients and active substances, which are part of plasma, derived medicinal
products or medical devices.
Processing
According to the terminology of directive 2005/62/EC, “processing means any step in the
preparation of blood component that is carried out between the collection of blood and the issuing
of a blood component”, e.g. separation and freezing of blood components. 	In this Annex,
processing in addition refers to those operations performed at the blood establishment that are
specific to plasma to be used for fractionation.
Qualified Person (QP)
The qualified person is the person referred to in Directive 2001/83/EC (Art. 48).
Responsible Person (RP)
The responsible person is the person referred to in Directive 2002/98/EC (Art. 9).
Third countries contract fractionation program
This is a contract fractionation in a plant of a fractionator/manufacturer in the EU/EEA, using
starting material from third countries and manufacturing products not intended for the EU/EEA
market.
1 At the time of publication of this Annex adoption of the Good Practice guidelines by the European Commission was
still pending

-- 3 of 13 --

4
1. 	Scope
1.1 The provisions of this Annex apply to medicinal products derived from human blood or
plasma, fractionated in or imported into the EU/EEA. The Annex applies also to the starting
material (e.g. human plasma) for these products. In line with the conditions set out in Directive
2003/63/EC, the requirements apply also for stable derivatives of human blood or human plasma
(e.g. Albumin) incorporated into medical devices.
1.2 	This 	Annex 	defines 	specific 	Good 	Manufacturing 	Practices 	(GMP) 	requirements 	for
processing, storage and transport of human plasma used for fractionation and for the manufacture
of medicinal products derived from human blood or plasma.
1.3 The Annex addresses specific provisions for when starting material is imported from third
countries and for contract fractionation programs for third countries.
1.4 The Annex does not apply to blood components intended for transfusion.
2. 	Principles
2.1 Medicinal products derived from human blood or plasma (and their active substances which
are used as starting materials) must comply with the principles and guidelines of Good
Manufacturing 	Practice 	(as 	laid 	down 	in 	Commission 	Directive 	2003/94/EC 	and 	the 	EU
Guidelines on GMP published by the European Commission) as well as the relevant marketing
authorisation (Directive 2001/83/EC, Art. 46, 51). They are considered to be biological medicinal
products and the starting materials include biological substances, such as cells or fluids (including
blood or plasma) of human origin (Directive 2001/83/EC Annex I Part I, No.3.2.1.1.b). Certain
special features arise from the biological nature of the source material. For example, disease-
transmitting agents, especially viruses, may contaminate the source material. The quality and
safety of these products relies therefore on the control of source materials and their origin as well
as on the subsequent manufacturing procedures, including infectious marker testing, virus removal
and virus inactivation.
2.2 In principle active substances used as starting material for medicinal products must comply
with the principles and guidelines of Good Manufacturing Practice (see 2.1). 	For starting
materials derived from human blood and plasma the requirements for the collection and testing
defined in Directive 2002/98/EC are to be followed. Collection and testing must be performed in
accordance with an appropriate quality system for which standards and specifications are defined
in the Annex of Directive 2005/62/EC and interpreted in the Good Practice guidelines referred to
in Article 2 (2) of Directive 2005/62/EC. Furthermore, the requirements of Directive 2005/61/EC
on traceability and serious adverse reactions and serious adverse event notifications from the
donor to the recipient apply. In addition the monographs of the European Pharmacopoeia are to be
observed (Directive 2001/83/EC, Annex 1, Part III No. 1.1.b).

-- 4 of 13 --

5
2.3 Starting material for the manufacture of medicinal products derived from human blood or
plasma imported from third countries and intended for use or distribution in the EU/EEA must
meet standards which are equivalent to Community Standards and specifications relating to a
quality system for blood establishments as set out in Commission Directive 2005/62/EC (Recital
6; Article 2(3)), the traceability and serious adverse reaction and serious adverse event notification
requirements as set out in Commission Directive 2005/61/EC (Recital 5; Article 7), and the
technical requirements for blood and blood components as set out in Commission Directive
2004/33/EC (Recital 4; point 2.3 of Annex V)
2.4 In the case of third country contract fractionation programs the starting material imported from
third countries must be in compliance with the quality and safety requirements as laid down in
Directive 2002/98/EC and in Annex V of Directive 2004/33/EC. The activities conducted within
the EU/EEA must fully comply with GMP. Consideration should be given to the Community
standards and specifications relating to a quality system for blood establishments set out in
Commission Directive 2005/62/EC, the traceability requirements and notification of serious
adverse reactions and events set out in Commission Directive 2005/61/EC and the relevant WHO
guidelines and recommendations as listed in the addendum
2.5 For all subsequent steps after collection and testing (e.g. processing (including separation),
freezing, storage and transport to the manufacturer) the requirements of Directive 2001/83/EC
apply and must therefore be done in accordance with the principles and guidelines of Good
Manufacturing Practice. Normally, these activities would be carried out under the responsibility of
a Qualified Person in an establishment with a manufacturing authorisation. Where specific
processing steps in relation to plasma for fractionation take place in a blood establishment, the
specific appointment of a Qualified Person may, however, not be proportionate given the presence
and responsibility of a Responsible Person. To address this particular situation and to ensure the
legal 	responsibilities 	of 	the 	Qualified 	Person 	are 	properly 	addressed, 	the 	fractionation
plant/manufacturer should establish a contract in accordance with Chapter 7 of the GMP Guide
with the blood establishment that defines respective responsibilities and the detailed requirements
in order to ensure compliance. The Responsible Person of the blood establishment and the
Qualified Person of the fractionation/manufacturing plant (see 3.5) should be involved in drawing
up this contract. The Qualified Person should ensure that audits are performed to confirm that the
blood establishment complies with the contract.
2.6 Specific requirements for documentation and other arrangements relating to the starting
material of plasma-derived medicinal products are defined in the Plasma Master File.
3. 	Quality Management
3.1 Quality management should govern all stages from donor selection to delivery of the finished
product. Reference is made to Directive 2005/61/EC for traceability up to and including the
delivery of plasma to the fractionation plant, and to Directive 2005/62/EC for all stages
concerning collection and testing of human blood and human plasma to be used for the
manufacture of medicinal products.
3.2 	Blood or plasma used as source material for the manufacture of medicinal products must be
collected by blood establishments and be tested in laboratories which apply quality systems in
accordance with Directive 2005/62/EC, are authorised by a national competent authority and are
subject to regular inspections as referred to in Directive 2002/98/EC. Third country contract
fractionation programs have to be notified to the competent EU authority by the manufacturer as

-- 5 of 13 --

6
referred to in Directive 2001/83/EC.
3.3 If plasma is imported from third countries it should only be purchased from approved
suppliers (e.g. blood establishments, including external warehouses). They should be named in the
specifications for starting materials as defined by the fractionation plant/manufacturer, and be
accepted by an EU/EEA competent authority (e.g. following an inspection) and by the Qualified
Person of the fractionation plant in the EU/EEA. Certification and release of plasma (plasma for
fractionation) as starting material is mentioned in section 6.8.
3.4 	Supplier 	qualification, 	including 	audits, 	should 	be 	performed 	by 	the 	fractionation
plant/manufacturer of the finished product according to written procedures. Re-qualification of
suppliers should be performed at regular intervals taking a risk-based approach into account.
3.5 The fractionation plant/manufacturer of the finished product should establish written contracts
with the supplying blood establishments. As a minimum the following key aspects should be
addressed:
-definition of duties and respective responsibilities
-quality system and documentation requirements
-donor selection criteria and testing
-requirements for the separation of blood into blood components/plasma
-freezing of plasma
-storage and transport of plasma
-traceability and post donation / collection information (including adverse events).
The test results of all units supplied by the blood establishment should be available to the
fractionation plant/manufacturer of the medicinal product. In addition, any fractionation step
subcontracted should be defined in a written contract.
3.6 A formal change control system should be in place to plan, evaluate and document all changes
that may affect the quality or safety of the products, or traceability. The potential impact of
proposed changes should be evaluated. The need for additional testing and validation, especially
viral inactivation and removal steps, should be determined.
3.7 An adequate safety strategy should be in place to minimise the risk from infectious agents and
emerging infectious agents. This strategy should involve a risk assessment that:
- defines an inventory holding time (internal quarantine time) before processing the plasma
i.e. to remove look back units2
- considers all aspects of virus reduction and/or testing for infectious agents or surrogates.
- considers the virus reduction capabilities, the pool size and other relevant aspects of the
manufacturing processes.
4. 	Traceability and Post Collection Measures
4.1 There must be a system in place that enables each donation to be traced, from the donor and
the donation via the blood establishment through to the batch of medicinal product and vice versa.
4.2 Responsibilities for traceability of the product should be defined (there should be no gaps):
2 Plasma units donated by donors during a defined period (as defined on a national / EU basis) before it is found that a
donation from a high-risk donor should have been excluded from processing, e.g. due to a positive test result.

-- 6 of 13 --

7
- from the donor and the donation in the blood establishment to the fractionation plant (this
is the responsibility of the RP at the blood establishment),
- from the fractionation plant to the manufacturer of the medicinal product and any
secondary facility, whether a manufacturer of a medicinal product or of a medical device
(this is the responsibility of the QP).
4.3 Data needed for full traceability must be stored for at least 30 years, according to Article 4 of
Directive 2005/61/EC and Article 14 of Directive 2002/98/EC3 .
4.4 The contracts (as mentioned in 3.5) between the blood establishments (including testing
laboratories) and the fractionation plant/manufacturer should ensure that traceability and post
collection 	measures 	cover 	the 	complete 	chain 	from 	the 	collection 	of 	the 	plasma 	to 	all
manufacturers responsible for release of the final products.
4.5 The blood establishments should notify the fractionating plant/manufacturer of any event
which may affect the quality or safety of the product including events listed in Annex II part A
and Annex III part A of Directive 2005/61/EC, and other relevant information found subsequent to
donor 	acceptance 	or 	release 	of 	the 	plasma, 	e.g. 	look 	back 	information 4 (post-collection
information). Where the fractionation plant/manufacturer is located in a third country, the
information should be forwarded to the manufacturer responsible for release in the EU/EEA of
any product manufactured from the plasma concerned. In both cases, if relevant for the quality or
safety of the final product, this information should be forwarded to the competent authority 5
responsible for the fractionation plant/manufacturer.
4.6 The notification procedure as described in 4.5 also applies when an inspection of a blood
establishment by a competent authority leads to a withdrawal of an existing licence/certificate/
approval.
4.7 The management of post-collection information should be described in standard operating
procedures and taking into account obligations and procedures for informing the competent
authorities. Post-collection measures should be available as defined in the “Note for Guidance on
Plasma Derived Medicinal Products" in its current version as adopted by the Committee for
Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) and published by the European Medicines Agency.6
5. 	Premises and Equipment
5.1 In order to minimise microbiological contamination or the introduction of foreign material into
the plasma pool, thawing and pooling of plasma units should be performed in an area conforming
at least to the Grade D requirements defined in Annex 1 of the EU-GMP Guide. Appropriate
clothing should be worn including face masks and gloves. All other open manipulations during the
manufacturing 	process 	should 	be 	done 	under 	conditions 	conforming 	to 	the 	appropriate
requirements of Annex 1 of the EU-GMP Guide.
5.2 Environmental monitoring should be performed regularly, especially during the ‘opening’ of
plasma containers, and during subsequent thawing and pooling processes in accordance with
3 Both Directives are linked to Article 109 of Directive 2001/83/EC by defining specific rules for medicinal products
derived from human blood or plasma
4 Information that appears if a subsequent donation from a donor previously found negative for viral markers is found
positive for any of the viral markers or any other risk factors which may induce a viral infection
5 as referred to in Directive 2001/83/EC
6 Current version at date of publication: CPMP/BWP/269/95

-- 7 of 13 --

8
Annex 1 of the EU-GMP Guide. Acceptance limits should be specified.
5.3 In the production of plasma-derived medicinal products, appropriate viral inactivation or
removal procedures are used and steps should be taken to prevent cross contamination of treated
with untreated products. Dedicated and distinct premises and equipment should be used for
manufacturing steps after viral inactivation treatment.
5.4 To avoid placing routine manufacture at risk of contamination from viruses used during
validation studies, the validation of methods for virus reduction should not be conducted in
production facilities. Validation should be performed according to the "Note for Guidance on
Virus Validation Studies: The Design, Contribution and Interpretation of Studies validating the
Inactivation and Removal of Viruses" in its current version as adopted by the Committee for
Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) and published by the European Medicines Agency7 .
6. 	Manufacturing
Starting material
6.1 The starting material should comply with the requirements of all relevant monographs of the
European 	Pharmacopoeia 	and 	of 	the 	conditions 	laid 	down 	in 	the 	respective 	marketing
authorisation dossier including the Plasma Master File. These requirements should be defined in
the 	written 	contract 	(see 	3.5) 	between 	the 	blood 	establishment 	and 	the 	fractionating
plant/manufacturer and controlled through the quality system.
6.2. Starting material for third country contract fractionation programs should comply with the
requirements as specified in 2.4.
6.3 Depending on the type of collection (i.e. either whole blood collection or automated apheresis)
different processing steps may be required. All processing steps (e.g. centrifugation and/or
separation, sampling, labelling, freezing) should be defined in written procedures.
6.4 	Any 	mix-ups 	of 	units 	and 	of 	samples, 	especially 	during 	labelling, 	as 	well 	as 	any
contamination, e.g. when cutting the tube segments/sealing the containers, must be avoided.
6.5 Freezing is a critical step for the recovery of proteins that are labile in plasma, e.g. clotting
factors. Freezing should therefore be performed as soon as possible after collection (see the
European Pharmacopoeia monograph No 0853 "Human Plasma for Fractionation" and where
relevant, monograph No 1646 "Human Plasma pooled and treated for virus inactivation"),
following a validated method.
6.6 The storage and transport of blood or plasma at any stage in the transport chain to the
fractionation plant should be defined and recorded. Any deviation from the defined temperature
should be notified to the fractionation plant. Qualified equipment and validated procedures should
be used.
Certification/release of plasma for fractionation as starting material
6.7 Plasma for fractionation should only be released, i.e. from a quarantine status, through systems
7 Current version at date of publication: CHMP/BWP/268/95

-- 8 of 13 --

9
and procedures that assure the quality needed for the manufacture of the finished product. It
should only be distributed to the plasma fractionation plant/manufacturer after it has been
documented by the Responsible Person (or in case of blood/plasma collection in third countries by
a person with equivalent responsibilities and qualifications) that the plasma for fractionation does
comply with the requirements and specifications defined in the respective written contracts and
that all steps have been performed in accordance with Good Practice and GMP Guidelines, as
appropriate.
6.8 On entering the fractionation plant, the plasma units should be released for fractionation under
the responsibility of the Qualified Person. The Qualified Person should confirm that the plasma
complies with the requirements of all relevant monographs and the conditions laid down in the
respective marketing authorisation dossier including the Plasma Master File or, in case of plasma
to be used for third country contract fractionation programs, with the requirements as specified in
2.4.
Processing of plasma for fractionation
6.9 The steps used in the fractionation process vary according to product and manufacturer and
usually include several fractionation/purification procedures, some of which may contribute to the
inactivation and/or removal of potential contamination.
6.10 Requirements for the processes of pooling, pool sampling and fractionation/purification and
virus inactivation/removal should be defined and followed thoroughly.
6.11 The methods used in the viral inactivation process should be undertaken with strict adherence
to validated procedures and in compliance with the methods used in the virus validation studies.
Detailed investigation of failures in virus inactivation procedures should be performed. Adherence
to the validated production process is especially important in the virus reduction procedures as any
deviation could result in a safety risk for the final product. Procedures should be in place, that take
this risk into consideration.
6.12 Any reprocessing or reworking may only be performed after a quality risk management
exercise has been performed and using processing steps as defined in the relevant marketing
authorisation.
6.13 A system for clearly segregating/distinguishing between products or intermediates which
have undergone a process of virus reduction, from those which have not, should be in place.
6.14 	Depending 	on 	the 	outcome 	of 	a 	thorough 	risk 	management 	process 	(taking 	into
consideration possible differences in epidemiology) production in campaigns including clear
segregation 	and 	defined 	validated 	cleaning 	procedures 	should 	be 	adopted 	when
plasma/intermediates of different origins is processed at the same plant. The requirement for such
measures should be based on the recommendations of the Guideline on Epidemiological Data on
Blood Transmissible Infections 8 . The risk management process should consider whether it is
necessary to use dedicated equipment in the case of third country contract fractionation programs.
6.15 For intermediate products intended to be stored, a shelf-life should be defined based on
stability data.
8 EMEA/CPMP/BWP/125/04

-- 9 of 13 --

10
6.16 The storage and transport of intermediate and finished medicinal products at any stage of the
transport chain should be specified and recorded. Qualified equipment and validated procedures
should be used.
7. 	Quality Control
7.1 Testing requirements for viruses or other infectious agents should be considered in the light of
knowledge emerging on infectious agents and on the availability of appropriate, validated test
methods.
7.2 The first homogeneous plasma pool (e.g. after separation of the cryoprecipitate from the
plasma pool) should be tested using validated test methods of suitable sensitivity and specificity,
according to the relevant European Pharmacopoeia monographs (e.g. No. 0853).
8. 	Release of intermediate and finished products
8.1 Only batches derived from plasma pools tested and found negative for virus markers/
antibodies and found in compliance with the relevant European Pharmacopoeia monographs,
including any specific virus cut-off limits, and with the approved specifications (e.g. Plasma
Master File), should be released.
8.2 The release of intermediates intended for further in-house processing or delivery to a different
site, and, the release of finished products should be performed by the Qualified Person and in
accordance with the approved marketing authorisation.
8.3. The release of intermediates and final products used in third country contract fractionation
programs should be performed by the Qualified Person on the basis of standards agreed with the
contract giver, and compliance with EU GMP standards. Compliance with relevant European
Pharmacopoeia monographs may not be applicable, as these products are not intended for the use
on the European market.
9. 	Retention of plasma pool samples
One plasma pool may be used to manufacture more than one batch and/or product. Retention
samples and corresponding records from every pool should be kept for at least one year after the
expiry date of the finished medicinal product with the longest shelf-life derived from the pool.
10. 	Disposal of waste
There should be written procedures for the safe and documented storage and disposal of waste,
disposable and rejected items (e.g. contaminated units, units from infected donors, out of date
blood, plasma, intermediate or finished products).

-- 10 of 13 --

11
Addendum
A) Member States should implement the following Directives and guidelines:
1. for collection and testing of blood and blood components:
Directive/Guidelines 	Title 	Scope
Directive
2002/98/EC 	of 	the
European Parliament
and of the Council
Setting 	standards 	of 	quality 	and
safety 	for 	the 	collection, 	testing,
processing, storage and distribution
of 	human 	blood 	and 	blood
components, 	amending 	Directive
2001/83/EC.
Art.2 	Defines 	standards 	of
quality 	and 	safety 	for 	the
collection 	and 	testing 	of
human 	blood 	and 	blood
components, 	whatever 	their
intended purpose, and for their
processing, 	storage 	and
distribution when intended for
transfusion.
Commission
Directive
2004/33/EC
Implementing Directive 2002/98/EC
of the European Parliament and of
the 	Council 	as 	regards 	certain
technical 	requirements 	for 	blood
and blood components
Defines 	the 	provision 	of
information 	to 	prospective
donors 	and 	information
required from donors (Part A
and B, Annex II), eligibility of
donors (Annex III), storage,
transport 	and 	distribution
conditions for blood and blood
components 	(Annex 	IV), 	as
well 	as 	quality 	and 	safety
requirements 	for 	blood 	and
blood components (Annex V).
Commission
Directive
2005/61/EC
Implementing Directive 2002/98/EC
of the European Parliament and of
the Council as regards traceability
requirements 	and 	notification 	of
serious 	adverse 	reactions 	and
events.
Defines 	traceability
requirements 	for 	blood
establishments, donors, blood
and 	blood 	components, 	and
for 	the 	final 	destination 	of
each 	unit, 	whatever 	the
intended 	purpose. 	It 	further
defines 	the 	reporting
requirements in the event of
serious 	adverse 	events 	and
reactions.

-- 11 of 13 --

12
Commission
Directive
2005/62/EC
Implementing Directive 2002/98/EC
of the European Parliament and of
the Council as regards Community
standards and specifications relating
to a quality system for blood estab-
lishments.
Defines the implementation of
quality system standards and
specifications as referred to in
article 	47 	of 	Directive
2001/83/EC.
2. for collection and regulatory submission of data/information for plasma for fractionation:
Directive/
Guidelines Title 	Scope
Directive
2001/83/EC 	of 	the
European Parliament
and the Council
On the Community Code relating to
medicinal products for human use.
Art. 2 Medicinal products for
human 	use 	intended 	to 	be
placed 	on 	the 	market 	in
Member 	States 	and 	either
prepared 	industrially 	or
manufactured 	by 	a 	method
involving 	an 	industrial
process, 	covering 	medicinal
products derived from human
blood or human plasma.
Commission
Directive
2003/63/EC
Amending Directive 2001/83/EC of
the European Parliament and of the
Council 	on 	the 	Community 	code
relating to medicinal products for
human use; Amending the Annex on
documentation 	of 	medicinal
products
Commission
Directive
2003/94/EC
Laying 	down 	the 	principles 	and
guidelines 	of 	good 	manufacturing
practice 	in 	respect 	of 	medicinal
products 	for 	human 	use 	and
investigational 	medicinal 	products
for human use
Art. 	1 	Principles 	and
guidelines 	of 	good
manufacturing 	practice 	in
respect of medicinal products
for 	human 	use 	and
investigational 	medicinal
products for human use
EU 	Guidelines 	on
Good Manufacturing
Practice
Giving 	interpretation 	on 	the
principles and guidelines on GMP
EMEA/CHMP/BWP
/3794/03 Rev.1, 15.
Nov. 2006
Guideline 	on 	the 	Scientific 	data
requirements for a Plasma Master
File (PMF) Revision 1
EMEA/CHMP/BWP
/548524/2008
EMEA Guideline
Guideline on Epidemiological Data
on Blood Transmissible Infections

-- 12 of 13 --

13
B). Other relevant documents:
Document 	Title 	Scope
Recommendation
No. 	R 	(95) 	15
(Council of Europe)
Guide to the Preparation, use and
quality 	assurance 	of 	blood
components
WHO
Recommendations
for 	the 	production,
control 	and
regulation of human
plasma 	for
fractination. Annex 4
in:
WHO 	Expert
Committee 	on
Biological
Standardization.
Fifty-sixth 	report.
Geneva, 	World
Health Organization,
2007
(WHO 	Technical
Report 	Series, 	No.
941)
WHO 	Recommendations 	for 	the
production, control and regulation of
human 	plasma 	for 	fractionation
Guidance on the production,
control 	and 	regulation 	of
human 	plasma 	for
fractionation
WHO guidelines on
Good Manufacturing
Practices 	for 	blood
establishments
Reference should be made to the latest revisions of these documents for current guidance.

-- 13 of 13 --

