[Source: 附件\2005_12_14_annex19_en.pdf]
[Format: EU GMP Regulation]

EUROPEAN COMMISSION
ENTERPRISE AND INDUSTRY DIRECTORATE-GENERAL
Consumer goods
Pharmaceuticals
Brussels, 14 December 2005
EudraLex
The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union
Volume 4
EU Guidelines to
Good Manufacturing Practice
Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use
Annex 19
Reference and Retention Samples
Document History
Date for new annex coming into operation 	01 June 2006
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium.
Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11

-- 1 of 5 --

2
1. 	Scope
1.1 	This Annex to the Guide to Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products (“the GMP
Guide”) gives guidance on the taking and holding of reference samples of starting materials, packag-
ing materials or finished products and retention samples of finished products.
1.2 	Specific requirements for investigational medicinal products are given in Annex 13 to the
Guide.
1.3 	This annex also includes guidance on the taking of retention samples for parallel imported/
distributed medicinal products.
2. 	Principle
2.1 	Samples are retained to fulfil two purposes; firstly to provide a sample for analytical testing
and secondly to provide a specimen of the fully finished product. Samples may therefore fall into two
categories:
Reference sample: a sample of a batch of starting material, packaging material or finished product
which is stored for the purpose of being analysed should the need arise during the shelf life of the
batch concerned. Where stability permits, reference samples from critical intermediate stages (e.g.
those requiring analytical testing and release) or intermediates, that are transported outside of the
manufacturer’s control, should be kept.
Retention sample: a sample of a fully packaged unit from a batch of finished product. It is stored for
identification purposes. For example, presentation, packaging, labelling, patient information leaflet,
batch number, expiry date should the need arise during the shelf life of the batch concerned. There
may be exceptional circumstances where this requirement can be met without retention of duplicate
samples e.g. where small amounts of a batch are packaged for different markets or in the production of
very expensive medicinal products.
For finished products, in many instances the reference and retention samples will be presented identi-
cally, i.e. as fully packaged units. In such circumstances, reference and retention samples may be re-
garded as interchangeable.
2.2 	It is necessary for the manufacturer, importer or site of batch release, as specified under sec-
tion 7 and 8, to keep reference and/or retention samples from each batch of finished product and, for
the manufacturer to keep a reference sample from a batch of starting material (subject to certain excep-
tions – see 3.2 below) and/or intermediate product. Each packaging site should keep reference samples
of each batch of primary and printed packaging materials. Availability of printed materials as part of
the reference and/or retention sample of the finished product can be accepted.
2.3 	The reference and/or retention samples serve as a record of the batch of finished product or
starting material and can be assessed in the event of, for example, a dosage form quality complaint, a
query relating to compliance with the marketing authorisation, a labelling/packaging query or a phar-
macovigilance report.
2.4 	Records of traceability of samples should be maintained and be available for review by com-
petent authorities.
3. 	Duration of Storage
3.1 	Reference and retention samples from each batch of finished product should be retained for at
least one year after the expiry date. The reference sample should be contained in its finished primary

-- 2 of 5 --

3
packaging or in packaging composed of the same material as the primary container in which the prod-
uct is marketed (for veterinary medicinal products other than immunologicals, see also Annex 4, para-
graphs 8 & 9).
3.2 	Unless a longer period is required under the law of the Member State of manufacture, samples
of starting materials (other than solvents, gases or water used in the manufacturing process) shall be
retained for at least two years after the release of product. That period may be shortened if the period
of stability of the material, as indicated in the relevant specification, is shorter. Packaging materials
should be retained for the duration of the shelf life of the finished product concerned.
4. 	Size of Reference and Retention Samples
4.1 	The reference sample should be of sufficient size to permit the carrying out, on, at least, two
occasions, of the full analytical controls on the batch in accordance with the Marketing Authorisation
File which has been assessed and approved by the relevant Competent Authority / Authorities. Where
it is necessary to do so, unopened packs should be used when carrying out each set of analytical con-
trols. Any proposed exception to this should be justified to, and agreed with, the relevant competent
authority.
4.2 	Where applicable, national requirements relating to the size of reference samples and, if nec-
essary, retention samples, should be followed.
4.3 	Reference samples should be representative of the batch of starting material, intermediate
product or finished product from which they are taken. Other samples may also be taken to monitor
the most stressed part of a process (e.g. beginning or end of a process). Where a batch is packaged in
two, or more, distinct packaging operations, at least one retention sample should be taken from each
individual packaging operation. 	Any proposed exception to this should be justified to, and agreed
with, the relevant competent authority.
4.4 	It should be ensured that all necessary analytical materials and equipment are still available, or
are readily obtainable, in order to carry out all tests given in the specification until one year after ex-
piry of the last batch manufactured.
5. 	Storage Conditions
5.1 	Storage of reference samples of finished products and active substances should be in accor-
dance with the current version of the Note for Guidance on Declaration of Storage Conditions for Me-
dicinal Products and Active Substances.
5.2 	Storage conditions should be in accordance with the marketing authorisation (e.g. refriger-
ated storage where relevant).
6. 	Written Agreements
6.1 	Where the marketing authorisation holder is not the same legal entity as the site(s) responsible
for batch release within the EEA, the responsibility for taking and storage of reference/retention sam-
ples should be defined in a written agreement between the two parties in accordance with Chapter 7 of
the EC Guide to Good Manufacturing Practice. This applies also where any manufacturing or batch
release activity is carried out at a site other than that with overall responsibility for the batch on the
EEA market and the arrangements between each different site for the taking and keeping of reference
and retention samples should be defined in a written agreement.
6.2 	The Qualified Person who certifies a batch for sale should ensure that all relevant reference
and retention samples are accessible at all reasonable times. Where necessary, the arrangements for
such access should be defined in a written agreement.

-- 3 of 5 --

4
6.3 	Where more than one site is involved in the manufacture of a finished product, the availability
of written agreements is key to controlling the taking and location of reference and retention samples.
7. 	Reference Samples – General Points
7.1 	Reference samples are for the purpose of analysis and, therefore, should be conveniently
available to a laboratory with validated methodology. For starting materials used for medicinal prod-
ucts manufactured within the EEA, this is the original site of manufacture of the finished product. For
finished products manufactured within the EEA, this is the original site of manufacture.
7.2 	For finished products manufactured by a manufacturer in a country outside the EEA;
7.2.1 	where an operational Mutual Recognition Agreement (MRA) is in place, the reference sam-
ples may be taken and stored at the site of manufacture. This should be covered in a written
agreement (as referred to in section 6 above) between the importer/site of batch release and
the manufacturer located outside the EEA.
7.2.2 	where an operational MRA is not in place, reference samples of the finished medicinal prod-
uct should be taken and stored at an authorised manufacturer located within the EEA. These
samples should be taken in accordance with written agreement(s) between all of the parties
concerned. The samples should, preferably, be stored at the location where testing on impor-
tation has been performed.
7.2.3 	reference samples of starting materials and packaging materials should be kept at the original
site at which they were used in the manufacture of the medicinal product.
8. 	Retention Samples – General Points
8.1 	A retention sample should represent a batch of finished products as distributed in the EEA and
may need to be examined in order to confirm non-technical attributes for compliance with the market-
ing authorisation or EU legislation. Therefore, retention samples should in all cases be located within
the EEA. These should preferably be stored at the site where the Qualified Person (QP) certifying the
finished product batch is located.
8.2 	In accordance with 8.1 above, where an operational MRA is in place and reference samples
are retained at a manufacturer located in a country outside the EEA (section 7.2.2 above), separate re-
tention samples should be kept within the EEA.
8.3 	Retention samples should be stored at the premises of an authorised manufacturer in order to
permit ready access by the Competent Authority.
8.4 	Where more than one manufacturing site within the EEA is involved in the manufacture im-
portation/packaging/testing/batch release, as appropriate of a product, the responsibility for taking and
storage of retention samples should be defined in a written agreement(s) between the parties con-
cerned.
9. 	Reference and Retention Samples for Parallel Imported/Parallel Distributed Products.
9.1 	Where the secondary packaging is not opened, only the packaging material used needs to be
retained, as there is no, or little, risk of product mix up.
9.2 	Where the secondary packaging is opened, for example, to replace the carton or patient infor-
mation leaflet, then one retention sample, per packaging operation, containing the product should be
taken, as there is a risk of product mix-up during the assembly process. It is important to be able to
identify quickly who is responsible in the event of a mix-up (original manufacturer or parallel import
assembler), as it would affect the extent of any resulting recall.

-- 4 of 5 --

5
10. 	Reference and Retention Samples in the Case of Closedown of a Manufacturer
10.1 	Where a manufacturer closes down and the manufacturing authorisation is surrendered, re-
voked, or ceases to exist, it is probable that many unexpired batches of medicinal products manufac-
tured by that manufacturer remain on the market. In order for those batches to remain on the market,
the manufacturer should make detailed arrangements for transfer of reference and retention samples
(and relevant GMP documentation) to an authorised storage site. The manufacturer should satisfy the
Competent Authority that the arrangements for storage are satisfactory and that the samples can, if
necessary, be readily accessed and analysed.
10.2 	If the manufacturer is not in a position to make the necessary arrangements this may be dele-
gated to another manufacturer. 	The Marketing Authorisation holder (MAH) is responsible for such
delegation and for the provision of all necessary information to the Competent Authority. In addition,
the MAH should, in relation to the suitability of the proposed arrangements for storage of reference
and retention samples, consult with the competent authority of each Member State in which any unex-
pired batch has been placed on the market.
10.3 	These requirements apply also in the event of the closedown of a manufacture located outside
the EEA. In such instances, the importer has a particular responsibility to ensure that satisfactory ar-
rangements are put in place and that the competent authority/authorities is/are consulted.

-- 5 of 5 --

