[Source: 附件\vol4_an7_2008_09_en.pdf]
[Format: EU GMP Regulation]

1
EUROPEAN COMMISSION
ENTERPRISE AND INDUSTRY DIRECTORATE-GENERAL
Consumer goods
Pharmaceuticals
Brussels, 01 September 2008
EudraLex
The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union
Volume 4
EU Guidelines to
Good Manufacturing Practice
Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use
Annex 7
Manufacture of Herbal Medicinal Products
Document History
Revision to specify application of GMP provisions for active
substances used as starting materials (Part II) for the
manufacture of herbal medicinal products. Additional changes
are in particular related to the new Directive 2004/24/EC on
traditional herbal medicinal products. Collaboration between
GMDP Inspectors Working Group (formerly Ad Hoc GMP
Inspection Services Working Group) and Committee of Herbal
Medicinal Products (HMPC).
May 2005 – March
2006
Public consultation 	May - July 2006
Date of revised version coming into operation 	01 September 2009
Commission Européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel – Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11

-- 1 of 6 --

2
Principle
Because of their often complex and variable nature, control of starting materials, storage and
processing assume particular importance in the manufacture of herbal medicinal products.
The “starting material” in the manufacture of a herbal medicinal product1 can be a medicinal
plant, a herbal substance2 or a herbal preparation1
. The herbal substance shall be of suitable
quality 	and 	supporting 	data 	should 	be 	provided 	to 	the 	manufacturer 	of 	the 	herbal
preparation/herbal medicinal product. 	Ensuring consistent quality of the herbal substance
may require more detailed information on its agricultural production. The selection of seeds,
cultivation and harvesting conditions represent important aspects of the quality of the herbal
substance and can influence the consistency of the finished product. Recommendations on an
appropriate quality assurance system for good agricultural and collection practice are
provided in the HMPC guidance document: “Guideline on Good Agricultural and Collection
Practice for starting materials of herbal origin”.
This Annex applies to all herbal starting materials: medicinal plants, herbal substances or
herbal preparations.
1 Throughout the annex and unless otherwise specified, the term “herbal medicinal product/ preparation”
includes “traditional herbal medicinal product/ preparation”.
2 The terms herbal substance and herbal preparation as defined in Directive 2004/24/EC are considered to be
equivalent to the Ph. Eur. terms herbal drug and herbal drug preparation respectively.

-- 2 of 6 --

3
Table illustrating the application of Good Practices to the manufacture of herbal
medicinal products3 .
Activity 	Good Agricultural
and Collection
Practice (GACP) 4
Part II of
the GMP
Guide †
Part I of
the GMP
Guide †
Cultivation, collection and harvesting of
plants, algae, fungi and lichens, and
collection of exudates
Cutting, and drying of plants, algae, fungi,
lichens and exudates *
Expression from plants and distillation **
Comminution, processing of exudates,
extraction from plants, fractionation,
purification, concentration or fermentation
of herbal substances
Further processing into a dosage form
including packaging as a medicinal product
† Explanatory Note.
The GMP classification of the herbal material is dependent upon the use made of it by the
manufacturing authorisation holder. The material may be classified as an active substance, an
intermediate or a finished product. 	It is the responsibility of the manufacturer of the
medicinal product to ensure that the appropriate GMP classification is applied.
* Manufacturers should ensure that these steps are carried out in accordance with the
marketing authorisation/registration. 	For those initial steps that take place in the field, as
justified in the marketing authorisation/registration, the standards of Good Agricultural and
Collection Practice for starting materials of herbal origin (GACP) is applicable. 	GMP is
applicable to further cutting and drying steps.
** Regarding the expression from plants and distillation, if it is necessary for these activities
to be an integral part of harvesting to maintain the quality of the product within the approved
specifications, it is acceptable that they are performed in the field, provided that the
cultivation is in compliance with GACP. These circumstances should be regarded as
exceptional and justified in the relevant marketing authorisation/ registration documentation.
For activities carried out in the field, appropriate documentation, control, and validation
according to the GMP principles should be assured. Regulatory authorities may carry out
GMP inspections of these activities in order to assess compliance.
Premises & Equipment
Storage areas
1. Herbal substances should be stored in separate areas. The storage area should be equipped
in such a way as to give protection against the entry of insects or other animals, especially
rodents. Effective measures should be taken to prevent the spread of any such animals and
3 This table expands in detail the herbal section of Table 1 in part II of the GMP Guide.
4 as published by the European Medicines Agency EMEA

-- 3 of 6 --

4
micro-organisms brought in with the herbal substance, to prevent fermentation or mould
growth and to prevent cross-contamination. Different enclosed areas should be used to
quarantine incoming herbal substances and for the approved herbal substances.
2. The storage area should be well aerated and the containers should be located in such a way
so as to allow free circulation of air.
3. Special attention should be paid to the cleanliness and maintenance of the storage areas
particularly when dust is generated.
4. Storage of herbal substances and herbal preparations may require special conditions of
humidity, temperature or light protection; these conditions should be provided and monitored.
Production area
5. Specific provisions should be made during sampling, weighing, mixing and processing
operations of herbal substances and herbal preparations whenever dust is generated, to
facilitate 	cleaning 	and 	to 	avoid 	cross-contamination, 	as 	for 	example, 	dust 	extraction,
dedicated premises, etc.
Equipment
6. The equipment, filtering materials etc. used in the manufacturing process must be
compatible with the extraction solvent, in order to prevent any release or undesirable
absorption of substance that could affect the product.
Documentation
Specifications for starting materials
7. Herbal medicinal product manufacturers must ensure that they use only herbal starting
materials manufactured in accordance with GMP and the Marketing Authorisation dossier.
Comprehensive documentation on audits of the herbal starting material suppliers carried out
by, or on behalf of the herbal medicinal product manufacturer should be made available.
Audit trails for the active substance are fundamental to the quality of the starting material.
The manufacturer should ensure that the suppliers of the herbal substance/preparation are in
compliance with Good Agricultural and Collection Practice.
8. To fulfil the specification requirements described in the basic requirements of the Guide
(chapter 4), documentation for herbal substances/preparations should include:
— the binomial scientific name of plant (genus, species, subspecies/variety and author
(e.g. Linnaeus); other relevant information such as the cultivar name and 	the
chemotype should also be provided, as appropriate;
— details of the source of the plant (country or region of origin, and where applicable,
cultivation, 	time 	of 	harvesting, 	collection 	procedures, 	possible 	pesticides 	used,
possible radioactive contamination etc.);
— which part(s) of the plant is/are used;
— when a dried plant is used, the drying system should be specified;
— a description of the herbal substance and its macro and microscopic examination;

-- 4 of 6 --

5
— suitable identification tests including, where appropriate, identification tests for
constituents with known therapeutic activity, or markers. Specific distinctive tests are
required where an herbal substance is liable to be adulterated/ substituted. A reference
authentic specimen should be available for identification purposes;
— the water content for herbal substances, determined in accordance with the European
Pharmacopoeia;
— assay of constituents of known therapeutic activity or, where appropriate, of markers;
the 	methods 	suitable 	to 	determine 	possible 	pesticide 	contamination 	and 	limits
accepted, in accordance with European Pharmacopoeia methods or, in absence thereof,
with an appropriate validated method, unless otherwise justified;
— tests to determine fungal and/or microbial contamination, including aflatoxins, other
mycotoxins, pest-infestations and limits accepted, as appropriate;
— tests for toxic metals and for likely contaminants and adulterants, as appropriate;
— tests for foreign materials, as appropriate;
— any 	other 	additional 	test 	according 	to 	the 	European 	Pharmacopoeia 	general
monograph on herbal substances or to the specific monograph of the herbal substance,
as appropriate.
Any treatment used to reduce fungal/microbial contamination or other infestation should be
documented. Specifications and procedures should be available and should include details of
process, tests and limits for residues.
Processing instructions
9. The processing instructions should describe the different operations carried out upon the
herbal substance such as cleaning, drying, crushing and sifting, and include drying time and
temperatures, and methods used to control cut size or particle size.
10. In particular, there should be written instructions and records, which ensure that each
container of herbal substance is carefully examined to detect any adulteration/substitution or
presence of foreign matter, such as metal or glass pieces, animal parts or excrement, stones,
sand, etc., or rot and signs of decay.
11. The processing instructions should also describe security sieving or other methods of
removing foreign materials and appropriate procedures for cleaning/selection of plant material
before the storage of the approved herbal substance or before the start of manufacturing.
12. For the production of an herbal preparation, instructions should include details of solvent,
time and temperature of extraction, details of any concentration stages and methods used.
Quality control
Sampling
13. Due to the fact that medicinal plant/herbal substances are heterogeneous in nature, their
sampling should be carried out with special care by personnel with particular expertise. Each
batch should be identified by its own documentation.
14. A reference sample of the plant material is necessary, especially in those cases where the
herbal 	substance 	is 	not 	described 	in 	the 	European 	Pharmacopoeia 	or 	in 	another

-- 5 of 6 --

6
Pharmacopoeia of a Member State. Samples of unmilled plant material are required if
powders are used.
15. Quality Control personnel should have particular expertise and experience in herbal
substances, herbal preparations and/or herbal medicinal products in order to be able to carry
out identification tests and recognise adulteration, the presence of fungal growth, infestations,
non-uniformity within a delivery of crude material, etc.
16. The identity and quality of herbal substances, herbal preparations and of herbal medicinal
products should be determined in accordance with the relevant current European guidance on
quality and specifications of herbal medicinal products and traditional herbal medicinal
products and, where relevant, to the specific Ph. Eur. Monographs.

-- 6 of 6 --

