[Source: 附件\2018_annex2_en.pdf]
[Format: EU GMP Regulation]

1
EudraLex
The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union
Volume 4
EU guidelines for
Good Manufacturing Practice for
Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use
Annex 2
Manufacture of Biological active substances and Medicinal Products for Human
Use
Legal basis for publishing the detailed guidelines: Article 47 of Directive 2001/83/EC on
the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use and Article 51 of Directive
2001/82/EC on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products. This document
provides guidance for the interpretation of the principles and guidelines of good
manufacturing practice (GMP) for medicinal products as laid down in Directive 2003/94/EC
for medicinal products for human use and Directive 91/412/EEC for veterinary use.
Status of the document: revision 2
Reasons for changes: Annex 2 of the GMP Guide has been revised as a consequence of the
adoption of the Guidelines on Good Manufacturing Practice specific to Advanced Therapy
Medicinal Products pursuant to Article 5 of Regulation (EC) 1394/2007 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 13 November 2007 on advanced therapy medicinal products
and amending Directive 2001/83/EC and Regulation (EC) No 726/2004.1
Deadline for coming into operation: 26 June 2018

-- 1 of 25 --

2
Scope
The methods employed in the manufacture of biological active substances and biological
medicinal products for human use ('biological active substances and medicinal products') are
a critical factor in shaping the appropriate regulatory control. Biological active substances
and medicinal products can be defined therefore largely by reference to their method of
manufacture. This annex provides guidance on the full range of active substances and
medicinal products defined as biological, with the exception of Advanced Therapy Medicinal
Products (“ATMPs”), as defined in Article 1(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1394/20071. The
ATMPs are not covered by the present guideline. Manufacturers of ATMPs should refer to
the Guidelines on Good Manufacturing Practice specific to Advanced Therapy Medicinal
Products referred to in Article 5 of the above quoted Regulation.
This annex is divided into two main parts:
a) Part A contains supplementary guidance on the manufacture of biological active
substances and medicinal products, from control over seed lots and cell banks through
to finishing activities, and testing.
b) Part B contains further guidance on selected types of biological active substances and
medicinal products.
This annex, along with several other annexes of the Guide to GMP in EudraLex Volume 4,
provides guidance which supplements that in Part I and in Part II of that Guide. There are two
aspects to the scope of this annex:
a) Stage of manufacture - for biological active substances to the point immediately prior
to their being rendered sterile, the primary guidance source is Part II. Guidance for
the subsequent manufacturing steps of biological products are covered in Part I.
b) Type of product - this annex provides guidance on the full range of medicinal products
defined as biological, with the exception of ATMPs.
These two aspects are shown in Table 1, it should be noted that this table is illustrative only
and is not meant to describe the precise scope. It should also be understood that in line with
the corresponding table in Part II of EudraLex, Volume 4, the level of GMP increases in detail
from early to later steps in the manufacture of biological active substances but GMP
principles should always be adhered to. The inclusion of some early steps of manufacture
within the scope of this Annex does not imply that those steps will be routinely subject to
inspection by the authorities.
Antibiotics are not defined as biological medicinal products, however where biological stages
of manufacture occur, guidance in this Annex may be used.
1 Regulation (EC) No 1394 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 November 2007 on advanced
therapy medicinal products and amending Directive 2001/83/EC and Regulation (EC) No 726/2004, OJ L 324,
10.12.2007, p.121

-- 2 of 25 --

3
Guidance for medicinal products derived from fractionated human blood or plasma is covered
in Annex 14 of EudraLex, Volume 4, and for non-transgenic plant products in Annex 7.
In certain cases, other legislation is applicable to the starting materials. For example,
(a) Tissue and cells used as starting materials for medicinal products: Directive 2004/23/EC
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on setting standards of
quality and safety for the donation, procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage and
distribution of human tissues and cells,2 and Commission Directive 2006/17/EC of 8 February
2006 implementing Directive 2004/23/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as
regards certain technical requirements for the donation, procurement and testing of human
tissues and cells3 cover only their donation, procurement and testing. Such tissues and cells
may provide the active substances for some biological medicinal product within the scope of
this annex at which point GMP and other medicinal product legislation requirements apply.
(b) Blood or blood components used as starting materials for medicinal products: Directive
2002/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 2003 setting
standards of quality and safety for the collection, testing, processing, storage and distribution
of human blood and blood components and amending Directive 2001/83/EC4 and its
Commission Directives provides the technical requirements5 for the selection of donors and
the collection and testing of blood and blood components.
Additionally, the manufacture and control of genetically modified organisms needs to comply
with local and national requirements. In accordance with Directive 2009/41/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 on the contained use of genetically
modified micro-organisms,6 appropriate containment and other protective measures shall be
established and maintained in facilities where any genetically modified micro-organism are
handled. Advice should be obtained according to national legislation in order to establish and
maintain the appropriate Biological Safety Level. There should be no conflicts with GMP
requirements.
Table 1. Illustrative guide to manufacturing activities within the scope of Annex 2.
Type and
source of
material
Example
product
Application of this guide to manufacturing steps shown in grey
1. Animal or
plant sources:
non-transgenic
Heparins,
insulin,
enzymes,
proteins,
allergen extract,
Collection of
plant, organ,
animal material
or fluid7
Cutting, mixing,
and /or initial
processing
Isolation and
purification
Formulation,
filling
2 OJ L 102, 7.4.2004, p. 48.
3 OJ L 38, 9.2.2006, p. 40.
4 OJ L 33, 8.2.2003, p.30.
5 Directive 2004/33/EC of 22 March 2004 implementing Directive 2002/98/EC of the European Parliament and
of the Council as regards certain technical requirements for blood and blood components and Good Practice
Guidelines for blood establishments as referenced in Directive 2016/1214, amending Directive 2005/62/EC.
6 OJ L 125,21.5.2009, p. 75.
7 See section B1 for the extent to which GMP principles apply.

-- 3 of 25 --

4
immunosera,
2. Virus or
bacteria/
fermentation/
cell culture
Viral or
bacterial
vaccines;
enzymes,
proteins
Establishment &
maintenance of
MCB8, WCB,
MVS, WVS
Cell culture
and/or
fermentation
Inactivation when
applicable, isolation
and purification
Formulation,
filling
3. Biotech-
nology -
fermentation/
cell culture
Recombinant
products, MAb,
allergens,
vaccines
Establishment &
maintenance of
MCB and WCB,
MSL, WSL
Cell culture
and/or
fermentation
Isolation, purification,
modification
Formulation,
filling
4. Animal
sources:
transgenic
Recombinant
proteins,
Master and
working
transgenic bank
Collection,
cutting, mixing,
and / or initial
processing
Isolation, purification
and modification
Formulation,
filling
5. Plant
sources:
transgenic
Recombinant
proteins,
vaccines,
allergen
Master and
working
transgenic bank
Growing,
harvesting9
Initial extraction,
isolation, purification,
modification
Formulation,
filling
6.Human
sources
Urine derived
enzymes,
hormones
Collection of
fluid10
Mixing, and/or
initial
processing
Isolation and
purification
Formulation,
filling
7. Human
sources
Products from
cells tissues
Donation,
procurement
and testing of
starting tissue /
cells11
Initial
processing,
isolation and
purification.
Cell isolation, culture,
purification,
combination with non-
cellular components.
Formulation,
combination,
filling
See Glossary for explanation of acronyms.
Principle
8 See section on ‘Seed lot and cell bank system’ for the extent to which GMP applies.
9 HMPC guideline on Good Agricultural and Collection Practice - EMEA/HMPC/246816/2005.
10 Principles of GMP apply, see explanatory text in ‘Scope’.
11 Human tissues and cells must comply with Directive 2004/23/EC and implementing Directives at these stages.
Increasing GMP requirements

-- 4 of 25 --

5
The manufacture of biological medicinal active substances and products involves certain
specific considerations arising from the nature of the products and the processes. The ways in
which biological medicinal products are manufactured, controlled and administered make
some particular precautions necessary.
Unlike conventional medicinal products, which are manufactured using chemical and physical
techniques capable of a high degree of consistency, the manufacture of biological active
substances and medicinal products involves biological processes and materials, such as
cultivation of cells or extraction from living organisms. These biological processes may
display inherent variability, so that the range and nature of by-products may be variable. As a
result, quality risk management (QRM) principles are particularly important for this class of
materials and should be used to develop the control strategy across all stages of manufacture
so as to minimise variability and to reduce the opportunity for contamination and cross-
contamination.
Since materials and processing conditions used in cultivation processes are designed to
provide conditions for the growth of specific cells and microorganisms, this provides
extraneous microbial contaminants the opportunity to grow. In addition, some products may
be limited in their ability to withstand a wide range of purification techniques particularly
those designed to inactivate or remove adventitious viral contaminants. The design of the
processes, equipment, facilities, utilities, the conditions of preparation and addition of buffers
and reagents, sampling and training of the operators are key considerations to minimise such
contamination events.
Specifications related to products (such as those in Pharmacopoeial monographs, Marketing
Authorisation (MA), and Clinical Trial Authorisation, (CTA)) will dictate whether and to
what stage substances and materials can have a defined level of bioburden or need to be
sterile. Similarly, manufacturing must be consistent with other specifications set out in the
MA or CTA guidance (e.g. number of generations (doublings, passages) between the seed lot
or cell bank).
For biological materials that cannot be sterilized (e.g. by filtration), processing must be
conducted aseptically to minimise the introduction of contaminants. Where they exist, CHMP
guidance documents should be consulted on the validation of specific manufacturing methods,
e.g. virus removal or inactivation. The application of appropriate environmental controls and
monitoring and, wherever feasible, in-situ cleaning and sterilization systems together with the
use of closed systems can significantly reduce the risk of accidental contamination and cross-
contamination.
Control usually involves biological analytical techniques, which typically have a greater
variability than physico-chemical determinations. A robust manufacturing process is therefore
crucial and in-process controls take on a particular importance in the manufacture of
biological active substances and medicinal products.
Biological medicinal products which incorporate human tissues or cells must take into
account the requirements of Directive 2004/23/EC and Commission Directive 2006/17/EC. In

-- 5 of 25 --

6
line with Commission Directive 2006/86/EC of 24 October 2006 implementing Directive
2004/23/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards traceability
requirements, notification of serious adverse reactions and events and certain technical
requirements for the coding, processing, preservation, storage and distribution of human
tissues and cells,12 collection and testing must be done in accordance with an appropriate
quality system for which standards and specifications are defined in its Annex..
Biological active substances and medicinal products must comply with the latest version of
the Note for Guidance on Minimising the Risk of Transmitting Animal Spongiform
Encephalopathy (TSE) Agents via Human and Veterinary Medicinal Products.
PART A. GENERAL GUIDANCE
Personnel
1. Personnel (including those concerned with cleaning, maintenance or quality control)
employed in areas where biological active substances and products are manufactured
and tested should receive training, and periodic retraining, specific to the products
manufactured to their work, including any specific security measures to protect
product, personnel and the environment.
2. The health status of personnel should be taken into consideration for product safety.
Where necessary, personnel engaged in production, maintenance, testing and animal
care (and inspections) should be vaccinated with appropriate specific vaccines and
have regular health checks.
3. Any changes in the health status of personnel, which could adversely affect the quality
of the product, should preclude work in the production area and appropriate records
kept. Production of BCG vaccine and tuberculin products should be restricted to staff
who are carefully monitored by regular checks of immunological status or chest X-
ray. Health monitoring of staff should be commensurate with the risk, medical advice
should be sought for personnel involved with hazardous organisms.
4. Where required to minimise the opportunity for cross-contamination, restrictions on
the movement of all personnel (including quality control (QC), maintenance and
cleaning staff) should be controlled on the basis of QRM principles. In general,
personnel should not pass from areas where exposure to live micro-organisms,
genetically modified organisms, toxins or animals to areas where other products,
inactivated products or different organisms are handled. If such passage is
unavoidable, the contamination control measures should be based on QRM principles.
Premises and Equipment
5. As part of the control strategy, the degree of environmental control of particulate and
microbial contamination of the production premises should be adapted to the active
12 OJ L 294, 25.10.2006, p. 32.

-- 6 of 25 --

7
substance, intermediate or finished product and the production step, bearing in mind
the potential level of contamination of the starting materials and the risks to the
product. The environmental monitoring programme should be supplemented by the
inclusion of methods to detect the presence of specific microorganisms (i.e. host
organism, yeast, moulds, anaerobes, etc) where indicated by the QRM process.
6. Manufacturing and storage facilities, processes and environmental classifications
should be designed to prevent the extraneous contamination of products. Prevention of
contamination is more appropriate than detection and removal, although
contamination is likely to become evident during processes such as fermentation and
cell culture. Where processes are not closed and there is therefore exposure of the
product to the immediate room environment (e.g. during additions of supplements,
media, buffers, gasses) control measures should be put in place, including engineering
and environmental controls on the basis of QRM principles. These QRM principles
should take into account the principles and guidance from the appropriate sections of
Annex 113 to EudraLex, Volume 4, when selecting environmental classification
cascades and associated controls.
7. Dedicated production areas should be used for the handling of live cells capable of
persistence in the manufacturing environment. Dedicated production area should be
used for the manufacture of pathogenic organisms (i.e. Biosafety level 3 or 4).
8. Manufacture in a multi-product facility may be acceptable where the following, or
equivalent (as appropriate to the product types involved) considerations and measures
are part of an effective control strategy to prevent cross-contamination:
(a) Knowledge of key characteristics of all cells, organisms and any adventitious
agents (e.g. pathogenicity, detectability, persistence, susceptibility to
inactivation) within the same facility.
(b) Where production is characterised by multiple small batches from different
starting materials factors such as the health status of donors and the risk of total
loss of product should be taken into account when considering the acceptance of
concurrent working during development of the control strategy.
(c) Live organisms and spores are prevented from entering non-related areas or
equipment by addressing all potential routes of cross-contamination and utilizing
single use components and engineering measures such as closed systems.
(d) Control measures to remove the organisms and spores before the subsequent
manufacture of other products, these control measures should also take the
13 Although the title of Annex 1 refers to the manufacture of sterile medicinal products it is not the intention to
force the manufacture of sterile product at a stage when a low bioburden is appropriate and authorised. Its use is
because it is the only EU GMP source of guidance on all of the classified manufacturing areas including the
lower grades D and C.

-- 7 of 25 --

8
heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) system into account. Cleaning
and decontamination for the organisms and spores should be validated.
(e) Environmental monitoring specific for the micro-organism being manufactured,
where the micro-organisms are capable of persistence in the manufacturing
environment and where methods are available, is conducted in adjacent areas
during manufacture and after completion of cleaning and decontamination.
Attention should also be given to risks arising with use of certain monitoring
equipment (e.g. airborne particle monitoring) in areas handling live and/or spore
forming organisms.
(f) Products, equipment, ancillary equipment (e.g. for calibration and validation) and
disposable items are only moved within and removed from such areas in a
manner that prevents contamination of other areas, other products and different
product stages (e.g. prevent contamination of inactivated or toxoided products
with non-inactivated products).
(g) Campaign-based manufacturing.
9. For finishing (secondary) operations14, the need for dedicated facilities will depend on
consideration of the above together with additional considerations such as the specific
needs of the biological medicinal product and on the characteristics of other products,
including any non-biological products, in the same facility. Other control measures for
finishing operations may include the need for specific addition sequences, mixing
speeds, time and temperature controls, limits on exposure to light and containment and
cleaning procedures in the event of spillages.
10. The measures and procedures necessary for containment (i.e. for environment and
operator safety) should not conflict with those for product quality.
11. Air handling units should be designed, constructed and maintained to minimise the
risk of cross-contamination between different manufacturing areas and may need to be
specific for an area. Consideration, based on QRM principles, should be given to the
use of single pass air systems.
12. Positive pressure areas should be used to process sterile products but negative pressure
in specific areas at the point of exposure of pathogens is acceptable for containment
reasons. Where negative pressure areas or safety cabinets are used for aseptic
processing of materials with particular risks (e.g. pathogens) they should be
surrounded by a positive pressure clean zone of appropriate grade. These pressure
cascades should be clearly defined and continuously monitored with appropriate alarm
settings.
13. Equipment used during handling of live organisms and cells, including those for
sampling, should be designed to prevent any contamination during processing.
14 Formulation, filling and packaging

-- 8 of 25 --

9
14. Primary containment15 should be designed and periodically tested to ensure the
prevention of escape of biological agents into the immediate working environment.
15. The use of 'clean in place' and ‘steam in place’ (‘sterilisation in place’) systems should
be used where possible. Valves on fermentation vessels should be completely steam
sterilisable.
16. Air vent filters should be hydrophobic and validated for their scheduled life span with
integrity testing at appropriate intervals based on appropriate QRM principles.
17. Drainage systems must be designed so that effluents can be effectively neutralised or
decontaminated to minimise the risk of cross-contamination. Local regulation must be
complied with to minimise the risk of contamination of the external environment
according to the risk associated with the biohazardous nature of waste materials.
18. Due to the variability of biological products or manufacturing processes,
relevant/critical raw materials (such as culture media and buffers) have to be measured
or weighed during the production process. In these cases, small stocks of these raw
materials may be kept in the production area for a specified duration based on defined
criteria such as for the duration of manufacture of the batch or of the campaign.
Animals
19. A wide range of animal species are used in the manufacture of a number of biological
medicinal products. These can be divided into 2 broad types of sources:
(a) Live groups, herds, flocks: examples include polio vaccine (monkeys),
immunosera to snake venoms and tetanus (horses, sheep and goats), allergens
(cats), rabies vaccine (rabbits, mice and hamsters), transgenic products (goats,
cattle).
(b) Animal materials derived post-mortem and from establishments such as abattoirs:
examples include abattoir sources for enzymes, anticoagulants and hormones
(sheep and pigs).
In addition, animals may also be used in quality control either in generic assays, e.g.
pyrogenicity, or specific potency assays, e.g. pertussis vaccine (mice), pyrogenicity (rabbits),
BCG vaccine (guinea-pigs).
20. In addition to compliance with TSE regulations, other adventitious agents that are of
concern (zoonotic diseases, diseases of source animals) should be monitored by an
ongoing health programme and recorded. Specialist advice should be obtained in
establishing such programmes. Instances of ill-health occurring in the source/donor
animals should be investigated with respect to their suitability and the suitability of in-
contact animals for continued use (in manufacture, as sources of starting and raw
materials, in quality control and safety testing), the decisions must be documented. A
15 See main GMP Glossary on ‘Containment’

-- 9 of 25 --

10
look-back procedure should be in place which informs the decision-making process on
the continued suitability of the biological active substance or medicinal product in
which the animal sourced starting or raw materials have been used or incorporated.
This decision-making process may include the re-testing of retained samples from
previous collections from the same donor animal (where applicable) to establish the
last negative donation. The withdrawal period of therapeutic agents used to treat
source/donor animals must be documented and used to determine the removal of those
animals from the programme for defined periods.
21. Particular care should be taken to prevent and monitor infections in the source/donor
animals. Measures should include the sourcing, facilities, husbandry, biosecurity
procedures, testing regimes, control of bedding and feed materials. This is of special
relevance to specified pathogen free animals where PhEur monograph requirements
must be met. Housing and health monitoring should be defined for other categories of
animals (e.g. healthy flocks or herds).
22. For products manufactured from transgenic animals, traceability should be maintained
in the creation of such animals from the source animals.
23. Note should be taken of Directive 2010/63/EU on the protection of animals used for
scientific purposes16. Housing for animals used in production and control of biological
active substances and medicinal products should be separated from production and
control areas.
24. For different animal species, key criteria should be defined, monitored, and recorded.
These may include age, weight and health status of the animals.
25. Animals, biological agents, and tests carried out should be the subject of an
identification system to prevent any risk of confusion and to control all identified
hazards.
Documentation
26. Starting and raw materials may need additional documentation on the source, origin,
distribution chain, method of manufacture, and controls applied, to assure an
appropriate level of control including their microbiological quality.
27. Some product types may require specific definition of what materials constitutes a
batch, particularly cells. For autologous and donor-matched situations, the
manufactured product should be viewed as a batch.
28. Where human cell or tissue donors are used full traceability is required from starting
and raw materials, including all substances coming into contact with the cells or
tissues through to confirmation of the receipt of the products at the point of use whilst
maintaining the privacy of individuals and confidentiality of health related
16 Directive 2010/63/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2010 on the protection
of animals used for scientific purposes, OJ L 276, 10.10.2010, p.33

-- 10 of 25 --

11
information. Traceability records must be retained for 30 years after the expiry date of
the medicinal product. Particular care should be taken to maintain the traceability of
medicinal products for special use cases, such as donor-matched cells. Directives
2002/98/EC and Commission Directive 2005/61/EC of 30 September 2005
implementing Directive 2002/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as
regards traceability requirements and notification of serious adverse reactions and
events17 apply to blood components when they are used as starting or raw materials in
the manufacturing process of medicinal products.
Production
29. Given the variability inherent in many biological active substances and medicinal
products, steps to increase process robustness thereby reducing process variability and
enhancing reproducibility at the different stages of the product lifecycle such as
process design should be reassessed during Product Quality Reviews.
30. Since cultivation conditions, media and reagents are designed to promote the growth
of cells or microbial organisms, typically in an axenic state, particular attention should
be paid in the control strategy to ensure there are robust steps that prevent or minimise
the occurrence of unwanted bioburden and associated metabolites and endotoxins. For
medicinal products from cells and tissues where production batches are frequently
small the risk of cross-contamination between cell preparations from different donors
with various health status should be controlled under defined procedures and
requirements.
Starting and raw materials
31. The source, origin and suitability of biological starting and raw materials (e.g.
cryoprotectants, feeder cells, reagents, culture media, buffers, serum, enzymes,
cytokines, growth factors) should be clearly defined. Where the necessary tests take a
long time, it may be permissible to process starting materials before the results of the
tests are available, the risk of using a potentially failed material and its potential
impact on other batches should be clearly understood and assessed under the
principles of QRM. In such cases, release of a finished product is conditional on
satisfactory results of these tests. The identification of all starting materials should be
in compliance with the requirements appropriate to its stage of manufacture. For
biological medicinal products further guidance can be found in Part I and Annex 8 and
for biological active substances in Part II.
32. The risk of contamination of starting and raw materials during their passage along the
supply chain must be assessed, with particular emphasis on TSE. Materials that come
into direct contact with manufacturing equipment or the product (such as media used
in media fill experiments and lubricants that may contact the product) must also be
taken into account.
17 OJ L 256, 1.10.2005, p. 32.

-- 11 of 25 --

12
33. Given that the risks from the introduction of contamination and the consequences to
the finished product is the same irrespective of the stage of manufacture,
establishment of a control strategy to protect the product and the preparation of
solutions, buffers and other additions should be based on the principles and guidance
contained in the appropriate sections of Annex 1. The controls required for the quality
of starting and raw materials and on the aseptic manufacturing process assume greater
importance, particularly for products in respect of which final sterilisation is not
possible. Where an MA or CTA provides for an allowable type and level of bioburden,
for example at active substance stage, the control strategy should address the means by
which this is maintained within the specified limits.
34. Where sterilization of starting and raw materials is required, it should be carried out
where possible by heat. Where necessary, other appropriate methods may also be used
for inactivation of biological materials (e.g. irradiation and filtration).
35. Reduction in bioburden associated with procurement of living tissues and cells may
require the use of other measures such as antibiotics at early manufacturing stages.
This should be avoided, but where it is necessary their use should be justified, they
should be removed from the manufacturing process at the stage specified in the MA or
CTA.
36. The donation, procurement and testing of human tissues and cells used as starting or
raw materials should be in accordance with Directive 2004/23/EC.18 Traceability for
human tissues and cells used as starting materials for biological medicinal products
should be maintained from the donor to the batch of a finished medicinal product.
Appropriate arrangements should be made between the manufacturer and the supplier
of tissues and cells regarding the transfer of health donor information that may
become available after the supply of the starting material and which may have an
impact on the quality or safety of the medicinal product manufactured therefrom.
(a) Their procurement, donation and testing in the EU is regulated under Directive
2004/23/EC and its implementing Commission directives. Such EU supply sites
must hold appropriate approvals from the national competent authority(ies) under
this Directive which should be verified as part of starting material supplier
management.
(b) Where such human cells or tissues are imported from third countries they must
meet equivalent Community standards of quality and safety equivalent to those
laid down in Directive 2004/23/EC. The traceability and serious adverse reaction
and serious adverse event notification requirements are set out in Directive
2006/86/EC.
(c) There may be some instances where processing of cells and tissues used as
starting materials for biological medicinal products will be conducted at tissue
18 For blood-derived cells, compliance with Directive 2002/98 regarding donation, procurement and testing is
likewise acceptable.

-- 12 of 25 --

13
establishments. Such processing steps, e.g. freezing, are under the scope of
Directive 2004/23/EC, which provides for the need of a Responsible Person (RP).
(d) Tissue and cells are released by the RP in the tissue establishment before shipment
to the medicinal product manufacturer, after which normal medicinal product
starting material controls apply. The test results of all tissues / cells supplied by
the tissue establishment should be available to the manufacturer of the medicinal
product. Such information must be used to make appropriate material segregation
and storage decisions. In cases where manufacturing must be initiated prior to
receiving test results from the tissue establishment, tissue and cells may be
shipped to the medicinal product manufacturer provided controls are in place to
prevent cross contamination with tissue and cells that have been released by the
RP in the tissue establishment.
(e) The transport of human tissues and cells to the manufacturing site must be
controlled by a written agreement between the responsible parties. The
manufacturing sites should have documentary evidence of adherence to the
specified storage and transport conditions.
(f) Continuation of traceability requirements started at tissue establishments through
to the recipient(s), and vice versa, including materials in contact with the cells or
tissues, should be maintained.
(g) A technical agreement should be in place between the responsible parties (e.g.
manufacturers, tissue establishment, Sponsors, MA Holder) which defines the
tasks of each party, including the RP and Qualified Person.
38. Where human or animal cells are used in the manufacturing process as feeder cells,
appropriate controls over the sourcing, testing, transport and storage should be in
place, including control of compliance with donation, procurement and testing
standards equivalent to ones set in the Directive 2004/23.
Seed lot and cell bank system
39. In order to prevent the unwanted drift of properties which might ensue from repeated
subcultures or multiple generations, the production of biological medicinal substances
and products obtained by microbial culture, cell culture or propagation in embryos and
animals should be based on a system of master and working virus seed lots and/or cell
banks.
40. The number of generations (doublings, passages) between the seed lot or cell bank, the
active biological substance and the finished product should be consistent with
specifications in the MA or CTA.
41. As part of product lifecycle management, establishment of seed lots and cell banks,
including master and working generations, should be performed under circumstances
which are demonstrably appropriate. This should include an appropriately controlled

-- 13 of 25 --

14
environment to protect the seed lot and the cell bank and the personnel handling it.
During the establishment of the seed lot and cell bank, no other living or infectious
material (e.g. virus, cell lines or cell strains) should be handled simultaneously in the
same area or by the same persons. For stages prior to the master seed or cell bank
generation, where only the principles of GMP may be applied, documentation should
be available to support traceability including issues related to components used during
development with potential impact on product safety (e.g. reagents of biological
origin) from initial sourcing and genetic development if applicable. For vaccines the
requirements of Ph Eur monograph 2005;153 “Vaccines for human use” will apply.
42. Following the establishment of master and working cell banks and master and working
seed lots, quarantine and release procedures should be followed. This should include
adequate characterization and testing for contaminants. Their on-going suitability for
use should be further demonstrated by the consistency of the characteristics and
quality of the successive batches of product. Evidence of the stability and recovery of
the seeds and banks should be documented and records should be kept in a manner
permitting trend evaluation.
43. Seed lots and cell banks should be stored and used in such a way as to minimize the
risks of contamination, (e.g. stored in the vapour phase of liquid nitrogen in sealed
containers) or alteration. Control measures for the storage of different seeds and/or
cells in the same area or equipment should prevent mix-up and take account the
infectious nature of the materials to prevent cross contamination.
45. Storage containers should be sealed, clearly labelled and kept at an appropriate
temperature. A stock inventory must be kept. The storage temperature should be
recorded continuously and, where used, the liquid nitrogen level monitored. Deviation
from set limits and corrective and preventive action taken should be recorded.
46. It is desirable to split stocks and to store the split stocks at different locations so as to
minimize the risks of total loss. The controls at such locations should provide the
assurances outlined in the preceding paragraphs.
47. The storage and handling conditions for stocks should be managed according to the
same procedures and parameters. Once containers are removed from the seed lot / cell
bank management system, the containers should not be returned to stock.
Operating principles
48. Change management should, on a periodic basis, take into account the effects,
including cumulative effects of changes (e.g. to the process) on the quality, safety and
efficacy of the finished product.
49. Critical operational (process) parameters, or other input parameters which affect
product quality, need to be identified, validated, documented and be shown to be
maintained within requirements.

-- 14 of 25 --

15
50. A control strategy for the entry of articles and materials into production areas should
be based on QRM principles. For aseptic processes, heat stable articles and materials
entering a clean area or clean/contained area should preferably do so through a double-
ended autoclave or oven. Heat labile articles and materials should enter through an air
lock with interlocked doors where they are subject to effective surface sanitisation
procedures. Sterilisation of articles and materials elsewhere is acceptable provided that
they are multiple wrappings, as appropriate to the number of stages of entry to the
clean area, and enter through an airlock with the appropriate surface sanitisation
precautions.
51. The growth promoting properties of culture media should be demonstrated to be
suitable for its intended use. If possible, media should be sterilized in situ. In-line
sterilizing filters for routine addition of gases, media, acids or alkalis, anti-foaming
agents etc. to fermenters should be used where possible.
52. Addition of materials or cultures to fermenters and other vessels and sampling should
be carried out under carefully controlled conditions to prevent contamination. Care
should be taken to ensure that vessels are correctly connected when addition or
sampling takes place.
53. Continuous monitoring of some production processes (e.g. fermentation) may be
necessary, such data should form part of the batch record. Where continuous culture is
used, special consideration should be given to the quality control requirements arising
from this type of production method.
54. Centrifugation and blending of products can lead to aerosol formation and
containment of such activities to minimise cross-contamination is necessary.
55. Accidental spillages, especially of live organisms, must be dealt with quickly and
safely. Qualified decontamination measures should be available for each organism or
groups of related organisms. Where different strains of single bacteria species or very
similar viruses are involved, the decontamination process may be validated with one
representative strain, unless there is reason to believe that they may vary significantly
in their resistance to the agent(s) involved.
56. If obviously contaminated, such as by spills or aerosols, or if a potential hazardous
organism is involved, production and control materials, including paperwork, must be
adequately disinfected, or the information transferred out by other means.
57. In cases where a virus inactivation or removal process is performed during
manufacture, measures should be taken to avoid the risk of recontamination of treated
products by non-treated products.
58. For products that are inactivated by the addition of a reagent (e.g. micro-organisms in
the course of vaccine manufacture) the process should ensure the complete
inactivation of live organism. In addition to the thorough mixing of culture and

-- 15 of 25 --

16
inactivant, consideration should be given to contact of all product-contact surfaces
exposed to live culture and, where required, the transfer to a second vessel.
59. A wide variety of equipment is used for chromatography. QRM principles should be
used to devise the control strategy on matrices, the housings and associated equipment
when used in campaign manufacture and in multi-product environments. The re-use of
the same matrix at different stages of processing is discouraged. Acceptance criteria,
operating conditions, regeneration methods, life span and sanitization or sterilization
methods of columns should be defined.
60. Where irradiated equipment and materials are used, Annex 12 to EudraLex, Volume 4,
should be consulted for further guidance.
61. There should be a system to assure the integrity and closure of containers after filling
where the final products or intermediates represent a special risk and procedures to
deal with any leaks or spillages. Filling and packaging operations need to have
procedures in place to maintain the product within any specified limits, e.g. time
and/or temperature.
62. Activities in handling vials containing live biological agents must be performed in
such a way to prevent the contamination of other products or egress of the live agents
into the work environment or the external environment. The viability of such
organisms and their biological classification should take into consideration as part of
the management of such risks.
63. Care should be taken in the preparation, printing, storage and application of labels,
including any specific text for patient-specific product of the contents on the
immediate and outer packaging.
In the case of autologous products, the unique patient identifier and the statement “for
autologous use only” should be indicated on the outer packaging or, where there is no
outer packaging, on the immediate packaging.
64. The compatibility of labels with ultra-low storage temperatures, where such
temperatures are used, should be verified.
65. Where donor (human or animal) health information becomes available after
procurement, which affects product quality, it should be taken into account in recall
procedures.
Quality control
66. In-process controls have a greater importance in ensuring the consistency of the
quality of biological active substance and medicinal products than for conventional
products. In-process control testing should be performed at appropriate stages of
production to control those conditions that are important for the quality of the finished
product.

-- 16 of 25 --

17
67. Where intermediates can be stored for extended periods of time (days, weeks or
longer), consideration should be given to the inclusion of finished product batches
made from materials held for their maximum in-process periods in the on-going
stability programme.
68. Certain types of cells (e.g. autologous cells) may be available in limited quantities and,
where allowed in the MA, a modified testing and sample retention strategy may be
developed and documented.
69. For cellular products, sterility tests should be conducted on antibiotic-free cultures of
cells or cell banks to provide evidence for absence of bacterial and fungal
contamination and to be able to detection fastidious organisms where appropriate.
70. For biological medicinal products with a short shelf life, which for the purposes of the
annex is taken to mean a period of 14 days or less, and which need batch certification
before completion of all end product quality control tests (e.g. sterility tests) a suitable
control strategy must be in place. Such controls need to be built on enhanced
understanding of product and process performance and take into account the controls
and attributes of starting and raw materials. The exact and detailed description of the
entire release procedure, including the responsibilities of the different personnel
involved in assessment of production and analytical data is essential. A continuous
assessment of the effectiveness of the quality assurance system must be in place
including records kept in a manner which permit trend evaluation.
Where end product tests are not available due to their short shelf life, alternative
methods of obtaining equivalent data to permit initial batch certification should be
considered (e.g. rapid microbiological methods). The procedure for batch certification
and release may be carried out in two or more stages - :
a) Assessment by designated person(s) of batch processing records, results from
environmental monitoring (where available) which should cover production
conditions, all deviations from normal procedures and the available analytical
results for review in preparation for the initial certification by the Qualified
Person.
b) Assessment of the final analytical tests and other information available for final
certification by the Qualified Person. A procedure should be in place to describe
the measures to be taken (including liaison with clinical staff) where out of
specification test results are obtained. Such events should be fully investigated
and the relevant corrective and preventive actions taken to prevent recurrence
documented.

-- 17 of 25 --

18
PART B. SPECIFIC GUIDANCE ON SELECTED PRODUCT TYPES
B1. ANIMAL SOURCED PRODUCTS19
This guidance applies to animal materials which includes materials from establishments such
as abattoirs. Since the supply chains can be extensive and complex, controls based on QRM
principles need to be applied, see also requirements of Ph Eur monographs, including the need
for specific tests at defined stages. Documentation to demonstrate the supply chain
traceability20 and clear roles of participants in the supply chain, typically including a
sufficiently detailed and current process map, should be in place.
1. Monitoring programmes should be in place for animal disease that are of concern to
human health. Organisations should take into account reports from trustworthy
sources on national disease prevalence when compiling their assessment of risk and
mitigation factors. Such organisations include the World Organisation for Animal
Health (OIE, Office International des Epizooties21). This should be supplemented by
information on health monitoring and control programme(s) at national and local
levels, the latter to include the sources (e.g. farm or feedlot) from which the animals
are drawn and the control measures in place during transport to the abattoirs.
2. Where abattoirs are used to source animal tissues, they should be shown to operate to
standards equivalent to those used in the EU. Account should be taken of reports from
organisations such as the Food and Veterinary Office22 who verify compliance with
the requirements of food safety and quality, veterinary and plant health legislation
within the EU and in third countries exporting to the EU.
3. Control measures for starting or raw materials at establishments such as abattoirs
should include appropriate elements of a Quality Management System to assure a
satisfactory level of operator training, materials traceability, control and consistency.
These measures may be drawn from sources outside EU GMP but should be shown to
provide equivalent levels of control.
4. Control measures for starting or raw materials should be in place which prevent
interventions which may affect the quality of materials, or which at least provides
evidence of such activities, during their progression through the manufacturing and
supply chain. This includes the movement of material between sites of initial
collection, partial and final purification(s), storage sites, hubs, consolidators and
brokers. Details of such arrangements should be recorded within the traceability
system and any breaches recorded, investigated and actions taken.
5. Regular audits of the starting or raw material supplier should be undertaken which
verify compliance with controls for materials at the different stages of manufacture.
19 See also PhEur monograph requirements, 0333
20 See Chapter 5 in EudraLex, Volume 4.
21 http://www.oie.int/eng/en_index.htm
22 http://ec.europa.eu/food/fvo/index_en.htm

-- 18 of 25 --

19
Issues must be investigated to a depth appropriate to their significance, for which full
documentation should be available. Systems should also be in place to ensure that
effective corrective and preventive actions are taken.
B2. ALLERGEN PRODUCTS
Materials may be manufactured by extraction from natural sources or manufactured by
recombinant DNA technology.
1. Source materials should be described in sufficient detail to ensure consistency in their
supply, e.g. common and scientific name, origin, nature, contaminant limits, method
of collection. Those derived from animals should be from healthy sources.
Appropriate biosecurity controls should be in place for colonies (e.g. mites, animals)
used for the extraction of allergens. Allergen products should be stored under defined
conditions to minimise deterioration.
2. The production process steps including pre-treatment, extraction, filtration, dialysis,
concentration or freeze-drying steps should be described in detail and validated.
3. The modification processes to manufacture modified allergen extracts (e.g. allergoids,
conjugates) should be described. Intermediates in the manufacturing process should be
identified and controlled.
4. Allergen extract mixtures should be prepared from individual extracts from single
source materials. Each individual extract should be considered as one active
substance.
B3. ANIMAL IMMUNOSERA PRODUCTS
1. Particular care should be exercised on the control of antigens of biological origin to
assure their quality, consistency and freedom from adventitious agents. The
preparation of materials used to immunise the source animals (e.g. antigens, hapten
carriers, adjuvants, stabilising agents), the storage of such material immediately prior
to immunisation should be in accordance with documented procedures.
2. The immunisation, test bleed and harvest bleed schedules should conform to those
approved in the CTA or MA.
3. The manufacturing conditions for the preparation of antibody sub-fragments (e.g. Fab
or F(ab’)2) and any further modifications must be in accordance with validated and
approved parameters. Where such enzymes are made up of several components, their
consistency should be assured.
B4. VACCINES
1. Where eggs are used, the health status of all source flocks used in the production of
eggs (whether specified pathogen free or healthy flocks) should be assured.

-- 19 of 25 --

20
2. The integrity of containers used to store intermediate products and the hold times must
be validated.
3. Vessels containing inactivated products should not be opened or sampled in areas
containing live biological agents.
4. The sequence of addition of active ingredients, adjuvants and excipients during the
formulation of an intermediate or final product must be in compliance with
specifications.
5. Where organisms with a higher biological safety level (e.g. pandemic vaccine strains)
are to be used in manufacture or testing, appropriate containment arrangements must
be in place. The approval of such arrangements should be obtained from the
appropriate national authority(ies) and the approval documents be available for
verification.
B5. RECOMBINANT PRODUCTS
1. Process condition during cell growth, protein expression and purification must be
maintained within validated parameters to assure a consistent product with a defined
range of impurities that is within the capability of the process to reduce to acceptable
levels. The type of cell used in production may require increased measures to be taken
to assure freedom from viruses. For production involving multiple harvest, the period
of continuous cultivation should be within specified limits.
2. The purification processes to remove unwanted host cell proteins, nucleic acids,
carbohydrates, viruses and other impurities should be within defined validated limits.
B6. MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY PRODUCTS
1. Monoclonal antibodies may be manufactured from murine hybridomas, human
hybridomas or by recombinant DNA technology. Control measures appropriate to the
different source cells (including feeder cells if used) and materials used to establish
the hybridoma / cell line should be in place to assure the safety and quality of the
product. It should be verified that these are within approved limits. Freedom from
viruses should be given particular emphasis. It should be noted that data originating
from products generated by the same manufacturing technology platform may be
acceptable to demonstrate suitability.
2. Criteria to be monitored at the end of a production cycle and for early termination of
production cycles should be verified that these are within approved limits.
3. The manufacturing conditions for the preparation of antibody sub-fragment (e.g. Fab,
F(ab’)2, scFv) and any further modifications (e.g. radio labelling, conjugation,
chemical linking) must be in accordance with validated parameters.
B7. TRANSGENIC ANIMAL PRODUCTS

-- 20 of 25 --

21
Consistency of starting material from a transgenic source is likely to be more problematic
than is normally the case for non-transgenic biotechnology sources. Consequently, there is an
increased requirement to demonstrate batch-to-batch consistency of product in all respects.
1. A range of species may be used to produce biological medicinal products, which may
be expressed into body fluids (e.g. milk) for collection and purification. Animals
should be clearly and uniquely identified and backup arrangements should be put in
place in the event of loss of the primary marker.
2. The arrangements for housing and care of the animals should be defined such that they
minimise the exposure of the animals to pathogenic and zoonotic agents. Appropriate
measures to protect the external environment should be established. A health-
monitoring programme should be established and all results documented, any incident
should be investigated and its impact on the continuation of the animal and on
previous batches of product should be determined. Care should be taken to ensure that
any therapeutic products used to treat the animals do not contaminate the product.
3. The genealogy of the founder animals through to production animals must be
documented. Since a transgenic line will be derived from a single genetic founder
animal, materials from different transgenic lines should not be mixed.
4. The conditions under which the product is harvested should be in accordance with MA
or CTA conditions. The harvest schedule and conditions under which animals may be
removed from production should be performed according to approved procedures and
acceptance limits.
B8. TRANSGENIC PLANT PRODUCTS
Consistency of starting material from a transgenic source is likely to be more problematic
than is normally the case for non-transgenic biotechnology sources. Consequently, there is an
increased requirement to demonstrate batch-to-batch consistency of product in all respects.
1. Additional measures, over and above those given in Part A, may be required to
prevent contamination of master and working transgenic banks by extraneous plant
materials and relevant adventitious agents. The stability of the gene within defined
generation numbers should be monitored.
2. Plants should be clearly and uniquely identified, the presence of key plant features,
including health status, across the crop should be verified at defined intervals through
the cultivation period to assure consistency of yield between crops.
3. Security arrangements for the protection of crops should be defined, wherever
possible, such that they minimise the exposure to contamination by microbiological
agents and cross-contamination with non-related plants. Measures should be in place
to prevent materials such as pesticides and fertilisers from contaminating the product.
A monitoring programme should be established and all results documented, any

-- 21 of 25 --

22
incident should be investigated and its impact on the continuation of the crop in the
production programme should be determined.
4. Conditions under which plants may be removed from production should be defined.
Acceptance limits should be set for materials (e.g. host proteins) that may interfere
with the purification process. It should be verified that the results are within approved
limits.
5. Environmental conditions (temperature, rain), which may affect the quality attributes
and yield of the recombinant protein from time of planting, through cultivation to
harvest and interim storage of harvested materials should be documented. The
principles in documents such as ‘Guideline on Good Agricultural and Collection
Practice for Starting Materials of Herbal origin’23 of the Committee of Herbal
Medicinal Products should be taken into account when drawing up such criteria.
GLOSSARY TO ANNEX 2.
Entries are only included where the terms are used in Annex 2 and require further
explanation. Definitions which already exist in legislation or other sources are cross
referenced. In addition to this glossary, the GMP-glossary in EudraLex, Volume 424 applies,
unless indicated otherwise.
Active substance. See Article 1(3a) of Directive 2001/83/EC.
Adjuvant. A chemical or biological substance that enhances the immune response against an
antigen.
Allergoids. Allergens which are chemically modified to reduce IgE reactivity.
Antigens. Substances (e.g. toxins, foreign proteins, bacteria, tissue cells) capable of inducing
specific immune responses.
Antibody. Proteins produced by the B-lymphocytes that bind to specific antigens. Antibodies
may divided into 2 main types based on key differences in their method of manufacture:
Monoclonal antibodies (MAb) – homogenous antibody population obtained from a single
clone of lymphocytes or by recombinant technology and which bind to a single epitope.
Polyclonal antibodies – derived from a range of lymphocyte clones, produced in human and
animals in response to the epitopes on most ‘non-self’ molecules.
Area. A specific set of rooms within a building associated with the manufacturing of any one
product or multiple products that has a common air handling unit.
23 Doc. Ref. EMEA/HMPC/246816/2005.
24 http://ec.europa.eu/health/files/eudralex/vol-4/pdfs-en/glos4en200408_en.pdf.

-- 22 of 25 --

23
Bioburden. The level and type (i.e. objectionable or not) of micro-organism present in raw
materials, media, biological substances, intermediates or products. Regarded as contamination
when the level and/or type exceed specifications.
Biological medicinal product. See 3rd paragraph of point 3.2.1.1.b. of Part I of Annex I to
Directive 2001/83/EC.
Biosafety level (BSL). The containment conditions required to safely handle organisms of
different hazards ranging from BSL1 (lowest risk, unlikely to cause human disease) to BSL4
(highest risk, cause severe disease, likely to spread and no effective prophylaxis or treatment
available).
Campaigned manufacture. The manufacture of a series of batches of the same product in
sequence in a given period of time followed by strict adherence to accepted control measures
before transfer to another product. The products are not run at the same time but may be run
on the same equipment.
Cell bank - a collection of appropriate containers, whose contents are of uniform
composition, stored under defined conditions. Each container represents an aliquot of a single
pool of cells.
Cell stock - primary cells expanded to a given number of cells to be aliquoted and used as
starting material for production of a limited number of lots of a cell based medicinal product.
Closed system. Where a drug substance or product is not exposed to the immediate room
environment during manufacture.
Contained use: See Article 2(c) of Directive 2009/41/EC for all genetically modified
organisms.
Deliberate release. See Article 2(3) of Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 12 March 2001 on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically
modified organisms and repealing Council Directive 90/220/EEC.34
Excipient. See Article 1(3b) of Directive 2001/83/EC.
Ex-vivo. Where procedures are conducted on tissues or cells outside the living body and
returned to the living body.
Feeder cells. Cells used in co-culture to maintain pluripotent stem cells. For human
embryonic stem cell culture, typical feeder layers include mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs) or human embryonic fibroblasts that have been treated to prevent them from dividing.
Gene. A sequence of DNA that codes for one (or more) protein(s).
Genetically modified organism (GMO). See Article 2(2) of Directive 2001/18/EC.
Hapten. A low molecular weight molecule that is not in itself antigenic unless conjugated to a
‘carrier’ molecule.

-- 23 of 25 --

24
Hybridoma. An immortalised cell line that secrete desired (monoclonal) antibodies and are
typically derived by fusing B-lymphocytes with tumour cells.
Intermediate product - see definitions in GMP Glossary and in Part II.
In-vivo. Procedures conducted in living organisms.
Look-back: documented procedure to trace biological medicinal substances or products
which may be adversely affected by the use or incorporation of animal or human materials
when either such materials fail release tests due to the presence of contaminating agent(s) or
when conditions of concern become apparent in the source animal or human.
Master cell bank (MCB) –An aliquot of a single pool of cells which generally has been
prepared from the selected cell clone under defined conditions, dispensed into multiple
containers and stored under defined conditions. The MCB is used to derive all working cell
banks. Master virus seed (MVS) – as above, but in relation to viruses; master transgenic
bank – as above but for transgenic plants or animals.
Monosepsis (axenic). A single organism in culture which is not contaminated with any other
Multi-product facility. A facility that manufactures, either concurrently or in campaign
mode, a range of different biological medicinal substances and products and within which
equipment train(s) may or may not be dedicated to specific substances or products.
Plasmid. A plasmid is a piece of DNA usually present in a bacterial cell as a circular entity
separated from the cell chromosome; it can be modified by molecular biology techniques,
purified out of the bacterial cell and used to transfer its DNA to another cell.
Raw materials. See 4th paragraph of point 3.2.1.1.b. of Part I of Annex I to Directive
2001/83/EC.
Responsible Person (RP). The person designated in accordance with Article 17 of Directive
2004/23/EC.
Scaffold – a support, delivery vehicle or matrix that may provide structure for or facilitate the
migration, binding or transport of cells and/or bioactive molecules.
Somatic cells. Cells, other than reproductive (germ line) cells, which make up the body of a
human or animal. These cells may be autologous (from the patient), allogeneic (from another
human being) or xenogeneic (from animals) somatic living cells, that have been manipulated
or altered ex vivo, to be administered in humans to obtain a therapeutic, diagnostic or
preventive effects.
Specified pathogen free (SPF)- Animal materials (e.g. chickens, embryos or cell cultures)
used for the production or quality control of biological medicinal products derived from
groups (e.g. flocks or herds) of animals free from specified pathogens. Such flocks or herds
are defined as animals sharing a common environment and having their own caretakers who
have no contact with non-SPF groups.

-- 24 of 25 --

25
Starting materials. See the 1st and 2nd paragraph of point 3.2.1.1.b of Part I of Annex I to
Directive 2001/83/EC.
Transgenic: an organism that contains a foreign gene in its normal genetic component for the
expression of biological pharmaceutical materials.
Working cell bank (WCB) – a homogeneous pool of micro-organisms or cells, that are
distributed uniformly into a number of containers derived from a MCB that are stored in such
a way to ensure stability and for use in production. Working virus seed (WVS) – as above
but in relation to viruses, working transgenic bank – as above but for transgenic plants or
animals.
Zoonosis: Animal diseases that can be transmitted to humans

-- 25 of 25 --

