[Source: 附件\annex11_01-2011_en.pdf]
[Format: EU GMP Regulation]

EUROPEAN COMMISSION
HEALTH AND CONSUMERS DIRECTORATE-GENERAL
Public Health and Risk Assessment
Pharmaceuticals
Brussels,
SANCO/C8/AM/sl/ares(2010)1064599
EudraLex
The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union
Volume 4
Good Manufacturing Practice
Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use
Annex 11: Computerised Systems
Legal basis for publishing the detailed guidelines: Article 47 of Directive 2001/83/EC on
the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use and Article 51 of Directive
2001/82/EC on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products. This document
provides 	guidance 	for 	the 	interpretation 	of 	the 	principles 	and 	guidelines 	of 	good
manufacturing practice (GMP) for medicinal products as laid down in Directive 2003/94/EC
for medicinal products for human use and Directive 91/412/EEC for veterinary use.
Status of the document: revision 1
Reasons for changes: the Annex has been revised in response to the increased use of
computerised systems and the increased complexity of these systems. Consequential
amendments are also proposed for Chapter 4 of the GMP Guide.
Deadline for coming into operation: 30 June 2011

-- 1 of 5 --

Commission Européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie,
B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11
Principle
This annex applies to all forms of computerised systems used as part of a GMP regulated
activities. A computerised system is a set of software and hardware components which
together fulfill certain functionalities.
The application should be validated; IT infrastructure should be qualified.
Where a computerised system replaces a manual operation, there should be no resultant
decrease in product quality, process control or quality assurance. There should be no increase
in the overall risk of the process.
General
1. 	Risk Management
Risk management should be applied throughout the lifecycle of the computerised system
taking into account patient safety, data integrity and product quality. As part of a risk
management system, decisions on the extent of validation and data integrity controls should
be based on a justified and documented risk assessment of the computerised system.
2. 	Personnel
There should be close cooperation between all relevant personnel such as Process Owner,
System 	Owner, 	Qualified 	Persons 	and 	IT. 	All 	personnel 	should 	have 	appropriate
qualifications, level of access and defined responsibilities to carry out their assigned duties.
3. 	Suppliers and Service Providers
3.1 	When third parties (e.g. suppliers, service providers) are used e.g. to provide, install,
configure, 	integrate, 	validate, 	maintain 	(e.g. 	via 	remote 	access), 	modify 	or 	retain 	a
computerised system or related service or for data processing, formal agreements must exist
between the manufacturer and any third parties, and these agreements should include clear
statements of the responsibilities of the third party. IT-departments should be considered
analogous.
3.2 	The competence and reliability of a supplier are key factors when selecting a product
or service provider. The need for an audit should be based on a risk assessment.
3.3 	Documentation supplied with commercial off-the-shelf products should be reviewed
by regulated users to check that user requirements are fulfilled.
3.4 	Quality system and audit information relating to suppliers or developers of software
and implemented systems should be made available to inspectors on request.
Project Phase
4. 	Validation
4.1 	The validation documentation and reports should cover the relevant steps of the life
cycle. Manufacturers should be able to justify their standards, protocols, acceptance criteria,
procedures and records based on their risk assessment.

-- 2 of 5 --

4.2 	Validation documentation should include change control records (if applicable) and
reports on any deviations observed during the validation process.
4.3 	An up to date listing of all relevant systems and their GMP functionality (inventory)
should be available.
For critical systems an up to date system description detailing the physical and logical
arrangements, data flows and interfaces with other systems or processes, any hardware and
software pre-requisites, and security measures should be available.
4.4 	User Requirements Specifications should describe the required functions of the
computerised system and be based on documented risk assessment and GMP impact. User
requirements should be traceable throughout the life-cycle.
4.5 	The regulated user should take all reasonable steps, to ensure that the system has been
developed in accordance with an appropriate quality management system. The supplier should
be assessed appropriately.
4.6 	For the validation of bespoke or customised computerised systems there should be a
process in place that ensures the formal assessment and reporting of quality and performance
measures for all the life-cycle stages of the system.
4.7 	Evidence of appropriate test methods and test scenarios should be demonstrated.
Particularly, system (process) parameter limits, data limits and error handling should be
considered. 	Automated 	testing 	tools 	and 	test 	environments 	should 	have 	documented
assessments for their adequacy.
4.8 If data are transferred to another data format or system, validation should include checks
that data are not altered in value and/or meaning during this migration process.
Operational Phase
5. 	Data
Computerised systems exchanging data electronically with other systems should include
appropriate built-in checks for the correct and secure entry and processing of data, in order to
minimize the risks.
6. 	Accuracy Checks
For critical data entered manually, there should be an additional check on the accuracy of the
data. This check may be done by a second operator or by validated electronic means. The
criticality and the potential consequences of erroneous or incorrectly entered data to a system
should be covered by risk management.
7. 	Data Storage
7.1 	Data should be secured by both physical and electronic means against damage. Stored
data should be checked for accessibility, readability and accuracy. Access to data should be
ensured throughout the retention period.
7.2 	Regular back-ups of all relevant data should be done. Integrity and accuracy of back-
up data and the ability to restore the data should be checked during validation and monitored
periodically.

-- 3 of 5 --

8. 	Printouts
8.1 	It should be possible to obtain clear printed copies of electronically stored data.
8.2 	For records supporting batch release it should be possible to generate printouts
indicating if any of the data has been changed since the original entry.
9. 	Audit Trails
Consideration should be given, based on a risk assessment, to building into the system
the creation of a record of all GMP-relevant changes and deletions (a system generated "audit
trail"). For change or deletion of GMP-relevant data the reason should be documented. Audit
trails need to be available and convertible to a generally intelligible form and regularly
reviewed.
10. 	Change and Configuration Management
Any changes to a computerised system including system configurations should only be made
in a controlled manner in accordance with a defined procedure.
11. 	Periodic evaluation
Computerised systems should be periodically evaluated to confirm that they remain in a valid
state and are compliant with GMP. Such evaluations should include, where appropriate, the
current range of functionality, deviation records, incidents, problems, upgrade history,
performance, reliability, security and validation status reports.
12. 	Security
12.1 	Physical and/or logical controls should be in place to restrict access to computerised
system to authorised persons. Suitable methods of preventing unauthorised entry to the
system may include the use of keys, pass cards, personal codes with passwords, biometrics,
restricted access to computer equipment and data storage areas.
12.2 The extent of security controls depends on the criticality of the computerised system.
12.3 Creation, change, and cancellation of access authorisations should be recorded.
12.4 	Management systems for data and for documents should be designed to record the
identity of operators entering, changing, confirming or deleting data including date and time.
13. 	Incident Management
All incidents, not only system failures and data errors, should be reported and assessed.
The root cause of a critical incident should be identified and should form the basis of
corrective and preventive actions.
14. 	Electronic Signature
Electronic records may be signed electronically. Electronic signatures are expected to:
a. have the same impact as hand-written signatures within the boundaries of the
company,
b. be permanently linked to their respective record,
c. include the time and date that they were applied.

-- 4 of 5 --

15. 	Batch release
When a computerised system is used for recording certification and batch release, the system
should allow only Qualified Persons to certify the release of the batches and it should clearly
identify and record the person releasing or certifying the batches. This should be performed
using an electronic signature.
16. 	Business Continuity
For the availability of computerised systems supporting critical processes, provisions should
be made to ensure continuity of support for those processes in the event of a system
breakdown (e.g. a manual or alternative system). 	The time required to bring the alternative
arrangements into use should be based on risk and appropriate for a particular system and the
business process it supports. These arrangements should be adequately documented and tested.
17. 	Archiving
Data may be archived. This data should be checked for accessibility, readability and integrity.
If relevant changes are to be made to the system (e.g. computer equipment or programs), then
the ability to retrieve the data should be ensured and tested.
Glossary
Application: 	Software 	installed 	on 	a 	defined 	platform/hardware 	providing 	specific
functionality
Bespoke/Customized computerised system: A computerised system individually designed
to suit a specific business process
Commercial of the shelf software: Software commercially available, whose fitness for use is
demonstrated by a broad spectrum of users.
IT Infrastructure: The hardware and software such as networking software and operation
systems, which makes it possible for the application to function.
Life cycle: All phases in the life of the system from initial requirements until retirement
including 	design, 	specification, 	programming, 	testing, 	installation, 	operation, 	and
maintenance.
Process owner: The person responsible for the business process.
System 	owner: 	The 	person 	responsible 	for 	the 	availability, 	and 	maintenance 	of 	a
computerised system and for the security of the data residing on that system.
Third Party: Parties not directly managed by the holder of the manufacturing and/or import
authorisation.

-- 5 of 5 --

