[Source: 第三部分\gmp_mah_rp_en.pdf]
[Format: EU GMP Regulation]

Official address Domenico Scarlattilaan 6 ● 1083 HS Amsterdam ● The Netherlands
An agency of the European Union
Address for visits and deliveries Refer to www.ema.europa.eu/how-to-find-us
Send us a question Go to www.ema.europa.eu/contact Telephone +31 (0)88 781 6000
© European Medicines Agency, 2022. Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.
10 January 2022
EMA/419571/2021
Human Medicines, Pharmacovigilance and Committees Division
Version 2
Reflection paper on Good Manufacturing Practice and
Marketing Authorisation Holders

-- 1 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 2/29
Table of contents
1. Introduction and Purpose ....................................................................... 3
2. Scope ...................................................................................................... 4
3. How this Reflection Paper sets out the various MAH Responsibilities ...... 5
4. The role of the MAH in Facilitating Compliance with GMP and the
Marketing Authorisation (MA)..................................................................... 5
5. Areas of the EC Guide to GMP that relate to MAHs ................................... 7
5.1. Outsourcing and Technical Agreements................................................ 7
5.3. Communication with Manufacturing Sites and Competent Authorities
(e.g. MA Dossier Information, Variations, Regulatory Commitments, etc.) 12
5.4. Product Quality Reviews (PQRs) ........................................................ 16
5.5. Quality Defects, Complaints and Product Recalls................................ 18
5.6. Maintenance of Supply of Medicinal Products ..................................... 20
5.7. Continual Improvement Activities ...................................................... 22
6. Falsified Medicines Directive (FMD)-related Responsibilities ................. 23
7. Conclusion ............................................................................................ 25
8. References ............................................................................................ 26
9. List of Abbreviations ............................................................................. 27

-- 2 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 3/29
1. Introduction and Purpose
This Reflection Paper is focussed on the GMP-related responsibilities that apply to Marketing
Authorisation Holder (MAH) companies. While it is recognised that many MAH companies are not
directly engaged in the manufacture of medicinal products themselves, the current European
Commission (EC) Guide to GMP (hereafter referred to as the ‘GMP Guide’) refers, in several places, to
MAHs and their responsibilities in relation to GMP.
In general, these responsibilities range from responsibilities that relate to outsourcing and technical
agreements, to ones that require the MAH to perform certain specific tasks (e.g. evaluating the results
of product quality reviews, agreeing irradiation cycles with manufacturers, etc.). These responsibilities
are spread over the various chapters and annexes of the GMP Guide, and are quite numerous.
This Reflection Paper seeks to provide clarity as to what the various responsibilities are and what they
mean for MAHs at a practical level. In addition to the MAH responsibilities in the GMP Guide, this paper
also addresses the various legislative provisions (i.e. in European Directives, Regulations and in other
guidelines) which relate to GMP and which concern MAHs. Some of the responsibilities stated in the
legislation (e.g. in Directive 2001/83/EC and Regulation (EU) 2019/6) and in applicable guidelines are
written in a way that they apply to marketing authorisation applicants, and they are included in this
Reflection Paper because those provisions also convey responsibilities upon marketing authorisation
holders in the post-authorisation phase.
It should be noted that, as indicated in Annex 16 of the GMP Guide, the ultimate responsibility for the
performance of a medicinal product over its lifetime, its safety, quality and efficacy, lies with the MAH.
(This does not alter the fact that, also as per Annex 16, the Qualified Person (QP) is responsible for
ensuring that each individual batch has been manufactured and checked in compliance with laws in
force in the Member State where certification takes place, in accordance with the requirements of the
marketing authorisation (MA) and with Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP).) It is also important to
note that, while certain activities of an MAH may be delegated to a manufacturer or other party, the
MAH retains the responsibilities which are outlined in this paper. The GMP guide also does not provide
for reduced MAH responsibilities (or for the delegation of responsibilities) in situations where the MAH
and the manufacturer belong to the same overall group of companies but where the two companies are
different legal entities. There is no difference in the responsibilities that apply to the MAH in this
situation relative to when the MAH and the manufacturer are from separate and unrelated companies.
It is acknowledged that many MAHs are part of large and complex global organisations which operate
shared Pharmaceutical Quality Systems. While tasks pertaining to the MAH responsibilities outlined in
this paper may be delegated to other groups or entities within the global organisation, the actual
responsibilities of the MAH may not be delegated.
While relevant activities pertaining to the GMP-related responsibilities held by MAHs may be delegated
by the MAH to its representative (if there is one) in a member state, none of the responsibilities may
be delegated to that person. (Note: The representative of the MAH, commonly known as the local
representative, is the person designated by the MAH to represent him in the Member State
concerned. (Ref. Part 18a of Article 1 in Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 58 (1) in Regulation (EU)
2019/6).
It is recognised that, while MAHs have a significant role in facilitating GMP and MA compliance, their
responsibilities in this area can, in some cases, be difficult to comprehend when reading the GMP Guide
or the applicable legislation. Notwithstanding this, such responsibilities are there and may be inferred.
This Reflection Paper seeks to provide clarity on these.
In relation to maintaining the supply of medicinal products, the EU medicines legislation, as well as the
GMP Guide, place obligations upon the MAH that relate to the supply of its medicinal products and to
the maintenance of such supply. This relates to the avoidance of medicines shortages for patients and
animals. It is considered that MAHs should also comply with any national requirements that may exist
within the EEA in relation to maintaining product supply.
All of the references currently in the GMP Guide (as of April 2019) that relate to MAH responsibilities
are discussed in this Reflection Paper. This paper, however, should not be taken to provide an
exhaustive list of those references on an ongoing basis. Rather, it sets out the general GMP-related
responsibilities and activities of the MAH, and it presents them under a number of different themes.

-- 3 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 4/29
These themes are outlined below in Section 5. MAH companies should have a system in place to
ensure that they remain up-to-date with current GMP requirements and updates thereafter.
Where possible, the text within each theme provides an explanation of what the various responsibilities
may mean at a practical level for MAHs; guidance is also given on what is expected of an MAH when
fulfilling that responsibility. It should be noted, however, that this Reflection Paper does not provide
guidance on ‘how’ the various responsibilities might be fulfilled.
Article 111 of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 123 (1c) Regulation (EU) 2019/6 give powers to
member state authorities to inspect the premises of MAH companies; this includes situations in which
there are grounds for suspecting non-compliance with the legal requirements laid down in the
Directives and Regulations, including with the principles and guidelines of GMP. When such inspections
are carried out, this Reflection Paper may serve as useful guidance for the competent authorities
performing the inspections.
2. Scope
The Reflection Paper concerns the responsibilities and activities of MAHs with respect to the European
Commission’s Guide to GMP (Parts I, II, and its relevant Annexes) for medicines for human and
veterinary use. It also covers the responsibilities of MAHs and Sponsors (where the Sponsor is different
from the MAH) with regard to the handling of quality defects with investigational medicinal products.
The scope also extends to certain legislative provisions that have relevance to GMP, such as those
stated in the GMP Directives 2003/94/EC and 91/412/EC (as amended), as well as relevant articles in
Directive 2001/83/EC and Regulation (EU) 2019/6.
When referring to manufacturers and manufacturing sites, the Reflection Paper is referring to any site
engaged in manufacturing and related activities (e.g. contract analysis) that are subject to EU GMP
requirements. This includes holders of manufacturing and importation authorisations, as well as
contract testing facilities e.g. performing batch release testing or ongoing stability testing; this latter
refers to annual stability testing.
This Reflection Paper is focussed on the GMP-related responsibilities that apply to all MAH companies,
regardless of the authorisation or registration procedure used. This means that it also applies to
holders of Registration and Traditional-use Registrations for herbal/homeopathic medicinal products.
FMD: The relevant provisions of the Falsified Medicines Directive 2011/62/EU and the related
Delegated Regulations (including the Safety Features Regulation 2016/161) are also within scope of
this Reflection Paper. 	Note that these requirements only apply to medicinal products for human use.
ATMPs: The principles set out in this paper also generally apply to MAHs of ATMPs. However, the
specific provisions of Part IV of the GMP Guide are not specifically discussed here, and there are certain
specific requirements that apply to ATMPs, as stated in Part IV (such as a 30 year data retention
requirement) that differ from what is set out in this Reflection Paper. Note that these requirements
only apply to medicinal products for human use.
GDP Responsibilities: While this Reflection Paper is not intended to address the GDP-related
responsibilities that may apply to MAHs, it is considered important to highlight here that MAHs do need
to understand the type of interfaces that may need to be in place with the wholesalers they employ or
engage. For example, current EU GDP guidelines in relation to medicinal products for human use require
that medicines wholesalers notify the MAH of certain information, e.g. information concerning falsified
products and quality defects (Ref. EU GDP Guidelines, 2013, Sections 6.2 and 6.4). 	As a result, it is
considered that MAHs should have systems in place to accept and act upon such information from the
wholesale distribution chain when received. (Note that in relation to veterinary medicinal products, new
GDP requirements are expected to be published by January 2022 and these may specify responsibilities
for MAHs of veterinary medicinal products.)
The Reflection Paper does not extend to other MAH responsibilities and activities that may be set-out in
other official guidance documents and legislation, such as those relating to other GxP areas,
pharmacovigilance, etc.

-- 4 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 5/29
3. How this Reflection Paper sets out the various MAH
Responsibilities
In Section 5 of this paper, each GMP requirement that applies to the MAH is outlined, with its key
message stated or summarised.
• 	This is then followed by the exact text that is in the GMP Guide (or in applicable legislation or in
other guidelines) on this point. In some cases, the exact text is presented between quotation
marks.
• 	A clear reference to the relevant part of the GMP Guide or the applicable legislation is then stated.
• 	Where possible, an explanation of what the requirement means at a practical level for the MAH is
provided, in italics.
4. The role of the MAH in Facilitating Compliance with GMP and
the Marketing Authorisation (MA)
While GMP compliance is the responsibility of the manufacturer, the MAH has a clear role in facilitating
GMP compliance. This is reflected in the multiple references to MAH responsibilities that are in the
GMP Guide. These responsibilities generally relate to:
• 	The provision of information by the MAH to competent authorities, manufacturing sites and
Qualified Persons;
• 	The collation of quality-related information from different actors in the manufacturing and
distribution chain.
Evidence of GMP Compliance: The applicant has the responsibility to make sure that the
manufacturers proposed in a new application for an MA hold a valid Manufacturer’s and Import
Authorisation (MIA) in the case of sites located in the EEA. In the case of manufacturers located
outside the EEA, there should be a valid proof of authorisation (equivalent to MIA) where one is
required, and a valid EU GMP Certificate (or, where an MRA or equivalent applies, evidence of
successful GMP inspection in relation to the product category / manufacturing activity of interest). For
sites located in EEA, the MIAs and GMP Certificates are publicly accessible on the EudraGMDP
database. Note that the validity of GMP certificates for sites which had been inspected more than 3
years prior to when performing the check may be verified with the relevant competent authority.
Abbreviated Version of CTD Module 3/Part 2 of Veterinary Marketing Authorisation dossier:
In the introductory chapter to the GMP Guide, it is stated that “Throughout the Guide, it is assumed
that the requirements of the Marketing Authorisation relating to the safety, quality and efficacy of the
products, are systematically incorporated into all the manufacturing, control and release for sale
arrangements of the holder of the Manufacturing Authorisation.” This implies that the MAH has a
responsibility to communicate what is registered in the MA to the manufacturing sites. In doing this,
MAHs sometimes prepare abbreviated versions of CTD module 3 / Part 2 of the veterinary dossier of
the MA for use by the manufacturing sites and QPs; this is considered acceptable; as long as those
abbreviated versions are sufficiently comprehensive and are subject to formal change control and
oversight activities. It is considered that the provision and use of such abbreviated versions of Module
3/Part 2 should be addressed in a technical agreement between the parties.
Labelling and Product Information: Care should also be taken to ensure that, what is registered in
CTD module 1 / Part 1 of the veterinary dossier in relation to the approved product labelling (including
the package leaflet) and changes to same are communicated to the manufacturer in a timeframe which
will enable the manufacturer to ensure that all batches it produces have the correct labelling and
product information.
Chapter 7 and MAHs: While Chapter 7 is primarily intended to deal with “the responsibilities of
manufacturers towards the Competent Authorities of the Member States with respect to the granting of
marketing and manufacturing authorisations” (Ref. Chapter 7, Principle), it is also directly relevant to
MAHs, as indicated by paragraph 7.3. This states: “Where the marketing authorization holder and the
manufacturer are not the same, appropriate arrangements should be in place, taking into account the
principles described in this chapter.” (Ref. Chapter 7, Paragraph 7.3).

-- 5 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 6/29
MA Variations: The need to provide the relevant manufacturing sites with the necessary information
about MA variation approval and target implementation dates is considered another important
responsibility for the MAH. It is a key activity which enables those sites to ensure that future batches
of the product, which may be QP-certified after a certain date, comply with the varied MA. It also
facilitates the generation of Product Quality Reviews in line with Chapter 1 of the EU GMP Guide. This
responsibility may be inferred from Chapter 7 of the GMP Guide, in relation to Outsourced Activities,
which states:
“The Contract Giver should provide the Contract Acceptor with all the information and
knowledge necessary to carry out the contracted operations correctly in accordance with
regulations in force, and the Marketing Authorisation for the product concerned.” (Ref.
Chapter 7, Paragraph 7.6)
Regulatory Commitments: The management of regulatory commitments (which are often made by
MAHs to competent authorities) is another area that can have a significant impact upon MA compliance
generally, if it is not under an appropriate level of control by the MAH. This is especially the case in
relation to the communication of such commitments to the manufacturing sites by the MAH; thus, the
importance of robust communication processes is highlighted in this Reflection Paper. Indeed, the
management of regulatory commitments may assume increased importance in the coming years, given
that the regulatory environment may move towards greater flexibility in the area of post-approval
change management, via ICH Q12, with respect to medicinal products for human use. Such flexibility
is likely to rely on the effectiveness of the pharmaceutical quality system that is in place, as this will
help assure regulatory compliance in the implementation of such post-approval changes. MAHs may
have an important role in this area.
Two-way Communication Systems: MAHs can facilitate compliance by establishing robust two-way
communication systems with national competent authorities, manufacturing sites, Qualified Persons
(QPs), and any organisations relevant to the monitoring of post-marketing quality (e.g. complaints
processing and on-going stability monitoring). Doing so can help ensure that:
• 	The manufacturing sites and QPs have visibility of what is registered in the marketing authorisation
and what, if any, regulatory commitments have been agreed with the competent authorities.
• 	The MAHs have adequate knowledge of the details of the manufacturing processes, including
impurity formation, and their related controls at the finished product and active substance
manufacturing sites. Such knowledge can enable MAHs ensure that the active substance and/or
finished product specifications reflect those controls, as necessary. This also includes situations
where there are Active Substance Master Files (ASMFs) and Certificates of suitability to the
monographs of the European Pharmacopoeia (CEPs) in place.
• 	The MAHs are adequately informed of the change management activities at the manufacturing
sites, particularly in relation to changes which may impact upon Modules 1, 2 and 3 / Parts 1 and 2
of the veterinary dossier, as well as on the contents of ASMFs and CEPs. This can help ensure that
the MAHs are involved in regulatory impact assessments for relevant change proposals and that
any necessary notifications or variation applications are made to the competent authorities.
• 	The manufacturing sites are adequately informed by the MAHs of any MA changes which may have
an impact on those sites, such as changes to the package leaflet, changes to specifications, etc.
Data integrity: This is another area of relevance to MAHs; it can result in GMP non-compliances if
there are not robust control systems to assure the integrity of data pertaining to the MA, which may be
used or required by the manufacturers. Thus, it is considered that MAHs should have systems in place
to ensure the integrity and reliability of the data that are used to discharge their responsibilities.
There should be assurance that product lifecycle data relating to GMP activities, including relevant MA
variations, are reliable, complete and accurate. The MAH should also ensure the long term security and
archiving of the data upon which the MA relies.
Compliance Management Process: MAHs should be aware of the ‘Compliance Management’ process
that has been put in place within the EEA; this is used in situations where a manufacturing site has
been found to be on the border between achieving a minimum level of GMP compliance and serious
GMP non-compliance. MAHs should be aware of their ability to facilitate compliance, and may find that
their involvement in the remediation of such issues is necessary, in relation to the products for which

-- 6 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 7/29
the MAH has responsibility. More information in this regard is available at (link – to be inserted when
available).
Non-compliance with MAH Obligations: Based on Article 116 of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article
130 (3) of Regulation (EU) 2019/6, a MA for which the MAH does not fulfil its various obligations may
be suspended, revoked or varied by the competent authority. Article 116 of Directive 2001/83/EC
states that an authorisation shall be “suspended, revoked, withdrawn or varied where the particulars
supporting the application as provided for in Article 8 or Articles 10, 10a, 10b, 10c and 11 are incorrect
or have not been amended in accordance with Article 23, or where the controls referred to in Article
112 have not been carried out.”
5. Areas of the EC Guide to GMP that relate to MAHs
As noted in the Introduction, there are various references within the GMP guide to MAH-related
responsibilities. These span a number of different chapters and annexes, and in this Reflection Paper,
they are grouped together under a number of different themes. These are set out below. While there
is some duplication across the different themes, it is considered helpful to consider the responsibilities
and activities in this way.
A number of the legislative provisions that exist within EU medicines legislation which concern the
GMP-related responsibilities of MAHs are also included within the various themes, where relevant. The
themes are:
• 	Outsourcing and Technical Agreements
• 	Audits and Qualification Activities
• 	Communication with Manufacturing Sites (e.g. MA Dossier Information, Variations, Regulatory
Commitments, etc.)
• 	Product Quality Reviews
• 	Quality Defects, Complaints and Product Recalls
• 	Maintenance of Supply of Medicinal Products
• 	Continual Improvement Activities
(Note that FMD-related responsibilities are discussed in Chapter 6.)
5.1. Outsourcing and Technical Agreements
This section discusses the various MAH responsibilities which apply to outsourced activities and
technical agreements. (Note that the term ‘technical agreement’ is considered to mean a document
that sets out the responsibilities and tasks/duties of the various parties, as agreed by those parties.)
Section 5.2 below, relating to Audits and Qualification, is also relevant here and its contents should be
noted.
See also section 5.3 below in relation to the importance of a technical agreement being in place
between the MAH and manufacturer when they are different legal entities. That section also addresses
communications in relation to situations in which there is an Active Substance Master File (ASMF) or a
CEP registered for a MA.
Delegation of Activities:
As noted earlier in this Reflection Paper, there is no provision within the GMP guide or in applicable
legislation for the delegation of responsibilities by an MAH to other parties. However, there may be
delegation of the tasks and activities which relate to those responsibilities, and this is relevant to the
topic of outsourcing. It is considered that any such delegation should be described in writing and
agreed by the relevant parties.
In general terms, it is the responsibility of the MAH to ensure that the person or entity, to whom any
task or activity has been delegated, possesses the required competence, information and knowledge to
successfully carry out the outsourced activities (Ref: GMP Guide Chapter 7, Paragraphs 7.5 and 7.6).
Special attention should be given to situations where tasks have been delegated in a fragmented way -
to more than one party – as applying oversight of multiple parties can be a challenge in the life-cycle
management of the medicinal product.

-- 7 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 8/29
Documenting Outsourced Activities:
There are obligations to ensure that outsourced activities are described in writing. Chapter 7 of the
GMP Guide requires that “any activity that is outsourced should be appropriately defined, agreed and
controlled in order to avoid misunderstandings which could result in a product or operation of
unsatisfactory quality.” (Ref: GMP Guide Chapter 7, Principle).
Chapter 7 of the GMP Guide also states that “Where the marketing authorization holder and the
manufacturer are not the same, appropriate arrangements should be in place, taking into account the
principles described in this chapter.” (Ref. Chapter 7, Paragraph 7.3). In practice there are various
scenarios that may apply. For example, the two parties may be different legal entities within the same
company group, or they may be unrelated companies. Regardless of such scenarios, it is considered
that the arrangements between the parties should be documented in technical agreements.
Where an MAH is engaged in an outsourcing activity, the above means that the MAH should agree in
writing what exactly the activity is, and how it will be controlled.
Compliance with the Marketing Authorisation:
If an outsourced activity is one that may affect compliance with the MA, there should be controls in
place which provide assurance that the requirements of the MA are complied with. This also has
relevance in relation to activities concerning post-approval changes and their implementation.
The GMP Guide states that “All arrangements for the outsourced activities including any proposed
changes in technical or other arrangements should be in accordance with regulations in force, and the
Marketing Authorisation for the product concerned, where applicable.” (Ref. Chapter 7, Paragraph 7.2)
Chapter 1 of the GMP Guide states that “Where manufacture is outsourced, the technical agreement
between MAH and manufacturer should address the respective responsibilities in producing and
evaluating the product quality review.” (Ref. Chapter 1, Paragraph 1.11). This means that the
manufacturer may be responsible for compiling and evaluating certain elements of the PQR, while the
MAH may be responsible for compiling and evaluating other parts of the PQR. (See below and also
Section 5.4 for further information in relation to PQRs.) It is noted that PQRs contain information in
relation to the MA, in terms of variations, post-approval commitments, etc.
Document Retention:
There are certain document retention requirements stated in the GMP Guide which are important from
the perspective of the MAH, as they support the MA, and also, documentation retention activities may
be the subject of outsourcing.
With regard to medicinal products, it is considered that while GMP-related document retention is the
responsibility of the manufacturer, the MAH has an interest in this area, given that certain
documentation supports information in the Marketing Authorisation. Chapter 4 of the GMP Guide
provides useful guidance relating to the storage and retention requirements of documentation. It
states that “…the retention period will depend on the business activity which the documentation
supports. Critical documentation, including raw data (for example relating to validation or stability),
which supports information in the Marketing Authorisation should be retained whilst the authorization
remains in force.” (Ref. Chapter 4, Paragraph 4.12)
While the above wording in Chapter 4 of the GMP Guide is aimed at the manufacturer and does not
convey a direct responsibility on the MAH, it is considered that the MAH should be satisfied with the
documentation retention policies and practices that are in place at the manufacturer, given the role of
certain documentation in supporting the MA. It is considered that the arrangements in this area should
be addressed in a technical agreement or a contract between the parties, whichever may apply.
The above paragraph from Chapter 4 of the GMP Guide goes on to state that:
“It may be considered acceptable to retire certain documentation (e.g. raw data supporting
validation reports or stability reports) where the data has been superseded by a full set of new
data. Justification for this should be documented and should take into account the
requirements for retention of batch documentation; for example, in the case of process
validation data, the accompanying raw data should be retained for a period at least as long as

-- 8 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 9/29
the records for all batches whose release has been supported on the basis of that validation
exercise.”
Again, the above text is relevant to the MAH, as validation data and reports, and stability reports also,
are key elements of the documentation needed to support an MA.
In relation to investigational medicinal products for human use, the GMP Directive 2003/94/EC places a
direct responsibility on the MAH with respect to the retention of documentation. In this regard, it
requires the batch documentation to:
“… be retained for at least five years after the completion or formal discontinuation of the last
clinical trial in which the batch was used. The sponsor or marketing authorisation holder, if
different, shall be responsible for ensuring that records are retained as required for marketing
authorisation in accordance with the Annex I to Directive 2001/83/EC, if required for a
subsequent marketing authorisation” (Ref. Directive 2003/94/EC, Article 9).
Please note that this requirement is not stated in Directive 2017/1572 which will replace Directive
2003/94/EC in 2019.
It is considered that record retention responsibilities and activities should be agreed between the
manufacturer, MAH or sponsor. The EMA Guideline EMA/202679/2018 (Guideline on the responsibilities
of the sponsor with regard to handling and shipping of investigational medicinal products for human
use in accordance with Good Clinical Practice and Good Manufacturing Practice) also provides useful
information in this regard.
Technical Agreements in relation to Product Quality Reviews (PQRs):
Chapter 1 of the GMP Guide states that “Where manufacture is outsourced, the technical agreement
between MAH and manufacturer should address the respective responsibilities in producing and
evaluating the product quality review.” (Ref. Chapter 1, Paragraph 1.11). This means that the
manufacturer may be responsible for compiling and evaluating certain elements of the PQR, while the
MAH may be responsible for compiling and evaluating other parts of the PQR. (See Section 5.4 below
for further information in relation to PQRs.)
Technical Agreements in relation to the manufacture of biological active substances and
medicinal products for human use:
In relation to the manufacture of biological active substances and medicinal products for human use,
there is a responsibility on the MAH to have a technical agreement in place with other parties which
describes its responsibilities relating to the sourcing of human derived starting materials for biological
products. The GMP Guide states that for human tissues and cells used as starting materials for
biological medicinal products, “a technical agreement should be in place between the responsible
parties (e.g. manufacturers, tissue establishment, Sponsors, MA Holder) which defines the tasks of
each party, including the RP [Responsible Person] and Qualified Person” (Ref. Annex 2, Paragraph
36(g)).
Technical Agreements in relation to the use of ionising radiation in the manufacture of
medicinal products:
In relation to the use of ionising radiation in the manufacture of medicinal products, there are certain
responsibilities for the MAH documented in Annex 12 of the GMP Guide.
One is a responsibility for the MAH to agree the design of irradiation cycles with the manufacturer, and
another is to agree how and where irradiation cycle records are retained. The Guide states that:
“When the required radiation dose is by design given during more than one exposure or passage
through the plant, this should be with the agreement of the holder of the marketing authorisation
and occur within a predetermined time period. Unplanned interruptions during irradiation should
be notified to the holder of the marketing authorisation if this extends the irradiation process
beyond a previously agreed period.” (Ref. Annex 12, Paragraph 33).

-- 9 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 10/29
Annex 12 also states that:
“Process and control records for each irradiation batch should be checked and signed by a
nominated responsible person and retained. The method and place of retention should be agreed
between the plant operator and the holder of the marketing authorisation.” (Ref. Annex 12,
Paragraph 44).
Annex 12 also requires the MAH of a product which includes ionising radiation in its processing to refer
to the CPMP guidance on “Ionising radiation in the manufacture of medicinal products” (Ref. Annex 12,
Note).
Some of the above responsibilities in Annex 12 are quite technical in nature, and they require the MAH
to be in a position to understand and to technically assess the design of irradiation cycles.
The direct requirement for the MAH to work with the manufacturer with regard to the design of irradiation
cycles is not considered a task that may be delegated by the MAH to the manufacturer of the medicinal
product. However, the records retention tasks are considered ones that may be delegated to the
manufacturer, and thus may be the subject of outsourcing arrangements.
Arrangements in relation to Reference and Retention Samples:
There is an Annex in the GMP Guide that provides guidance in relation to reference and retention
samples. This is Annex 19, and it states certain responsibilities for the MAH in this area, mainly in
relation to agreeing with the relevant manufacturers the arrangements for the taking and storage of
reference and retention samples. (Note that Annex 6 of the GMP Guide provides an exemption to
manufacturers of medicinal gases for the need to take and store reference and retention samples of
such products, unless such samples are otherwise required.)
In the section titled ‘Written Agreements’ in Annex 19, the following is stated:
“Where the marketing authorisation holder is not the same legal entity as the site(s)
responsible for batch release within the EEA, the responsibility for taking and storage of
reference/retention samples should be defined in a written agreement between the two parties
in accordance with Chapter 7 of the EC Guide to Good Manufacturing Practice. This applies also
where any manufacturing or batch release activity is carried out at a site other than that with
overall responsibility for the batch on the EEA market and the arrangements between each
different site for the taking and keeping of reference and retention samples should be defined
in a written agreement.” (Ref. Annex 19, Paragraph 6.1)
Annex 19 also addresses situations involving the closedown of a manufacturer and how reference and
retention samples are to be managed. It states that
“If the manufacturer is not in a position to make the necessary arrangements this may be
delegated to another manufacturer. The Marketing Authorisation holder (MAH) is responsible
for such delegation and for the provision of all necessary information to the Competent
Authority. In addition, the MAH should, in relation to the suitability of the proposed
arrangements for storage of reference and retention samples, consult with the competent
authority of each Member State in which any unexpired batch has been placed on the market.”
(Ref. Annex 19, Paragraph 10.2)
While the taking and storage of reference and retention samples has often been regarded as purely a
manufacturing activity, it is clear from the above that the MAH has responsibilities in this area also.
5.2. Audits & Qualification Activities
There are references to GMP audits within the European medicines legislation which have implications
for applicants for MAs as well as for the corresponding MAHs. There is also a need for finished product
manufacturers to be suitably qualified in order to be able to verify, for the applicant and the MAH, the
GMP compliance status of the active substance manufacturer(s), as required in legislation.
QP Declarations regarding GMP compliance status of the active substance manufacturer:

-- 10 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 11/29
Article 8(3)(ha) of Directive 2001/83/EC, for example, places a legal obligation on the applicant to
provide information in the MA application concerning the GMP compliance status of the manufacturer of
the active substance, and in this regard, reference is made to audits of that manufacturer. This article
requires the applicant to provide “A written confirmation [QP Declaration] that the manufacturer of the
medicinal product has verified compliance of the manufacturer of the active substance, with [the]
principles and guidelines of good manufacturing practice by conducting audits, in accordance with point
(f) of Article 46.”
Article 46 relates to the obligations that are placed upon the holder of the manufacturing
authorisation, and sub-point (f) requires the finished product manufacturer “to use only active
substances, which have been manufactured in accordance with good manufacturing practice
for active substances and distributed in accordance with good distribution practices for active
substances.”
Article 8(3)(ha) goes on to state that the written confirmation submitted by the applicant “shall contain
a reference to the date of the audit and a declaration that the outcome of the audit confirms that the
manufacturing complies with the principles and guidelines of good manufacturing practice.”
The above means that the MA applicant has a responsibility to confirm that such audits have been
carried out prior to the submission of the MA application, and to be satisfied with the GMP compliance
status of the manufacturer of the active substance, as determined by the holder of the medicinal
product manufacturing authorisation. The above confirmation should be made in the form of a QP
Declaration. (Note: The term “Written Confirmation” as used in Article 8(3)(ha) is essentially a
reference to the ‘QP Declaration’; it is the term used in the European Commission “Guidelines on the
details of the various categories of variations” for the QP Declaration.)
In relation to medicinal products for veterinary use, EC Regulation 2019/6 states the following: “The
manufacturing processes for the active substance(s) and finished product shall comply with Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP).” (Ref. Article 8 (a) and (b), Annex I item 4.1, and Annex II section I
item I.1.4). In parallel, Article 93 (j) of Regulation 2019/06 requires that the holder of a manufacturing
authorisation “shall use as starting materials only active substances which have been manufactured in
accordance with good manufacturing practice for active substances and distributed in accordance with
good distribution practice for active substances”. Article 93 (l) requires that the holder of a MA “shall
perform audits based on a risk assessment of the manufacturers, distributors and importers from
whom the holder of a manufacturing authorisation obtains active substances”.
In addition, Eudralex Volume 6 B, Notice to Applicants, states that a declaration(s) from the Qualified
Person of the manufacturing authorisation holder is required.
The above means that a QP Declaration based on an audit is also expected for medicinal products for
veterinary use.
The above responsibilities to confirm to the competent authority the GMP status of the active
substance manufacturer continues into the post-authorisation phase of the medicinal product, and it is
the MAH that bears this responsibility. In this regard:
• 	GMP audits of the manufacturer are again required – such audits are referred to in the guidelines
concerning MA variations (Ref. EC Guidelines 2013/C 223/01 and Commission Implementing
Regulation (EU) 2021/17 of 8 January 2021).
• 	In the section dealing with Administrative Changes, the aforementioned guidelines place a
responsibility on the MAH to submit a Type 1A variation notification in relation to changes in the
date of the audit to verify GMP compliance of the manufacturer of the active substance. This
concerns notifying the competent authority of new audits of such sites.
• 	The MAH is required to provide a “written confirmation from the manufacturer of the finished
product stating verification of compliance of the manufacturer of the active substance with
principles and guidelines of good manufacturing practices” (Ref. Administrative Change A.8). Note
that a variation application is not needed when the information has been otherwise transmitted to
the authorities (e.g. through a QP declaration).

-- 11 of 29 --

The document titled ‘Guidance for the template for the qualified person’s declaration
concerning GMP compliance of active substance manufacture’ also addresses the
responsibility of the MAH to ensure that a written confirmation of compliance of the
manufac
EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 12/29
The document titled ‘Guidance for the template for the qualified person’s declaration concerning GMP
compliance of active substance manufacture’ also addresses the responsibility of the MAH to ensure
that a written confirmation of compliance of the manufacturer of the active substance with GMP is
provided to the competent authority. This document also indicates that such confirmations of
compliance should be based on audits; it states that “Audits of each site for GMP compliance should be
undertaken at regular intervals, normally within three years. Justification should be provided if the
date since the last audit exceeds this period.”
• 	Use of the QP declaration template facilitates the provision of the required audit-related
information by the MAH.
• 	The audit reports should be readily available and shared with the authorities, if requested.
• 	The above variation (or QP declaration) requirement relates to the fact that the GMP compliance
status of the active substance manufacturer is expected to be confirmed by the manufacturer of
the finished product and transmitted to the MAH, and that such confirmations (declarations) are
based on audits carried out by, or on behalf of, the manufacturer of the finish product, as required
by Article 46(f) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 93 (l) of Regulation 2019/6.
The above responsibilities apply to the MA Applicant and then to the MAH after the MA has been
granted.
5.3. 	Communication 	with 	Manufacturing 	Sites 	and 	Competent
Authorities 	(e.g. 	MA 	Dossier 	Information, 	Variations, 	Regulatory
Commitments, etc.)
The Need for Two-way Communication Systems:
As noted earlier in this paper, the introductory chapter to the GMP Guide refers to the need for “the
requirements of the Marketing Authorisation, relating to the safety, quality and efficacy of the
product”, to be “systematically incorporated into all the manufacturing, control and release for sale
arrangements of the holder of the Manufacturing Authorisation”. This implies the need for cooperation
between the MAH and manufacturer, and the need for two-way communication systems to be in place
between them, particularly in relation to what is registered in the MA.
Likewise, the so called ‘GMP Directives’ 2003/94/EC and 91/412 require the manufacturer to ensure
that “all manufacturing operations for medicinal products subject to a marketing authorisation are
carried out in accordance with the information provided in the application for marketing authorisation
as accepted by the competent authorities”. (Ref. Article 5 of Directives 2003/94/EC and 91/412).
It is reasonable to take the view that manufacturers cannot comply with the GMP requirement for
batches to be in line with the relevant MA unless the MAH communicates to them what is registered in
the dossier. A similar point is made in the preamble to the forthcoming new GMP Directive 2017/1572.
This will replace Directive 2003/94/EC in 2019, when EU regulation 536/2014 on Clinical Trials enters
into force, and it states the following:
“All medicinal products for human use manufactured or imported into the Union, including
medicinal products intended for export, should be manufactured in accordance with the
principles and guidelines of good manufacturing practice. However, for the manufacturer to be
able to comply with those principles and guidelines, cooperation between the manufacturer and
the marketing authorisation holder, when they are different legal entities, is necessary. The
obligations of the manufacturer and marketing authorisation holder vis-à-vis each other should
be defined in a technical agreement between them.” (Ref. Directive 2017/1572, Preamble Point
4)
Thus, it is considered important that there is cooperation and communication between the MAH and
manufacturer, when they are different legal entities, and that such arrangements be described in a
technical agreement between the parties.

-- 12 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 13/29
Specific Example of Required Communications:
Example 1 - The use of ionising radiation in the manufacture of medicinal products
An example which illustrates the need for such communication can be found in Annex 12 to the GMP
Guide. This Annex concerns the use of ionising radiation in the manufacture of medicinal products.
• 	It states that the “required dose including justified limits will be stated in the marketing
authorisation” (Ref. EU GMP Guide Annex 12, Paragraph 3).
• 	This implies a need for communication between the MAH and the manufacturer in relation to the
strength and limits of the irradiating dose.
• 	The MAH has a responsibility to ensure that this information is registered in the marketing
authorisation, and he is expected to communicate what has been registered with the
manufacturer, so that the manufacturer may maintain compliance with the marketing
authorisation.
Example 2 - ASMFs and CEPs
Another area of importance in relation to communication processes and responsibilities is where there
is an Active Substance Master File (ASMF) registered for a marketing authorisation which has both
closed and open parts, or where a Certificate of Suitability to the monographs of the European
Pharmacopoeia (CEP) is registered (or applied for) in the MA. (Note: the information in the CEP
replaces those MA dossier sections that normally describe the manufacture and control during
manufacture of the active substance (as well as stability data, in cases where the CEP includes a re-
test date). Such CEP information will have been evaluated by the European Directorate for the Quality
of Medicines (EDQM).)
These approaches are covered by Directive 2001/83/EC and Regulation 2019/6, as follows:
With regard to medicinal products for human use:
- 	“For a well-defined active substance, the active substance manufacturer or the applicant may
arrange for the (i) detailed description of the manufacturing process, (ii) quality control during
manufacture, and (iii) process validation, to be supplied in a separate document directly to the
competent authorities by the manufacturer of the active substance as an Active Substance
Master File. In this case, the manufacturer shall, however, provide the applicant with all of the
data, which may be necessary for the latter to take responsibility for the medicinal product.
The manufacturer shall confirm in writing to the applicant that he shall ensure batch to batch
consistency and not modify the manufacturing process or specifications without informing the
applicant. Documents and particulars supporting the application for such a change shall be
supplied to the competent authorities; these documents and particulars will be also supplied to
the applicant when they concern the open part of the active substance master file” (Ref.
Directive 2001/83/EC, Annex 1).
- 	“Where the active substance and/or a raw and starting material or excipient(s) are the subject
of a monograph of the European Pharmacopoeia, the applicant can apply for a certificate of
suitability that, where granted by the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines, shall
be presented in the relevant section of this Module (i.e. Module 3). Those certificates of
suitability of the monograph of the European Pharmacopoeia are deemed to replace the
relevant data of the corresponding sections described in this Module. The manufacturer shall
give the assurance in writing to the applicant that the manufacturing process has not been
modified since the granting of the certificate of suitability by the European Directorate for the
Quality of Medicines” (Ref. Directive 2001/83/EC, Annex I)
With regard to medicinal products for veterinary use:
- 	“For a non-biological active substance, the applicant may arrange for the information on active
substance in point (2) to be supplied directly to the competent authorities by the manufacturer

-- 13 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 14/29
of the active substance as an Active Substance Master File. In this case, the manufacturer of
the active substance shall provide the applicant with all the data (applicant’s part of the Active
Substance Master File) which may be necessary for the latter to take responsibility for the
veterinary medicinal product. A copy of the data provided by the active substance
manufacturer to the applicant shall be included in the medicinal product dossier. The
manufacturer of the active substance shall confirm in writing to the applicant that he shall
ensure batch-to-batch consistency and not modify the manufacturing process or specifications
without informing the applicant.” (Ref. Regulation 2019/6 Annex II)
- 	“Where a certificate of suitability has been issued by the European Directorate for the Quality
of Medicines and HealthCare for a starting material, active substance or excipient, that
certificate constitutes the reference to the relevant monograph of the European
Pharmacopoeia. Where a certificate of suitability is referred to, the manufacturer shall give an
assurance in writing to the applicant that the manufacturing process has not been modified
since the granting of the certificate of suitability by the European Directorate for the Quality of
Medicines and HealthCare.“ (Regulation 2019/6 Annex II)
It is important to note that, irrespective of whether an ASMF or a CEP is in place, the MAH retains his
responsibility for ensuring the quality of the active substance. In this regard, the following points
should be noted:
• 	The MAH is responsible for ensuring, that it, in conjunction with the finished product manufacturer,
has access to all relevant information concerning the current manufacture of the active substance.
This requires effective communication processes to be in place between the concerned parties in
relation to the manufacture of the active substance. It is expected that the MA applicant/ MAH
have access to the open part (or its equivalent) of the ASMF, including when a CEP is used. In the
case of an aseptically manufactured active substance, full information on the sterilization step
needs to be made available to the finished product manufacturer and should be included in Module
3/Part II of the MA dossier. The MA applicant/MAH should ensure that they have access to all the
relevant information.
• 	Such communication processes should also address proposed changes in the manufacturing
process or specifications, to enable the MAH to assess the implications of the proposed change on
the finished product and to apply for any required variations to the MA, in accordance with the EU
Variation Classification Guideline.
• 	In addition, if a CEP for an active substance is registered in an MA, this does not exempt the MAH
from the responsibility to have available a declaration of GMP (signed by the Qualified Person)
relating to the GMP compliance status of the active substance manufacturer. See the earlier text
in this Reflection Paper for information on QP Declarations.
• 	The level of knowledge that the MAH has in relation to the manufacture and control of the active
substance should be such that it permits the MAH to take responsibility for the quality of the
medicinal product. This should not be less than when there is an ASMF registered in the MA.
In order for the MAH (or applicant) to be able to fulfil the responsibilities referred to above, it is
considered that he should ensure that the above requirements are clearly addressed, and if necessary
via a technical agreement between the MAH and the active substance manufacturer.
Example 3 – Documentation reflecting what is registered is the MA
A third example is found in Chapter 4 of the GMP Guide, in relation to Documentation. It states that
“Documents should be designed, prepared, reviewed, and distributed with care. They should comply
with the relevant parts of Product Specification Files, Manufacturing and Marketing Authorisation
dossiers, as appropriate. The reproduction of working documents from master documents should not
allow any error to be introduced through the reproduction process” (Ref. GMP Guide Chapter 4,
Paragraph 4.2).
This implies a responsibility for the MAH to ensure that any documents that it provides to the
manufacturing sites relating to what is registered in the MA accurately reflect the relevant parts of the
MA.

-- 14 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 15/29
• 	Examples of such documents might include the release and shelf-life specifications for the product,
information in relation to the registered manufacturing process, copies of the registered artwork for
the product packaging, etc.
• 	It is especially important that documents relating the registered product information intended for
the patient or user of the medicine (i.e. labels and leaflets) are in line with the marketing
authorisation, and that changes (variations) to these items are communicated to the
manufacturing site in a timely manner.
The Effectiveness and Frequency of Communications:
It is considered that there should be effective and frequent communications between the MAH and the
relevant manufacturing sites. This is not just in relation to what is registered in the MA, but also, it
might concern the results of Product Quality Reviews (PQRs), information about regulatory
commitments, proposed changes which may affect Modules 1, 2 and 3 / Parts 1 and 2 of the MA,
among other things.
Documenting Communication Processes – Complexity and Legal Arrangements:
How such communication processes and responsibilities may be documented depends on the
relationship between the various entities, and on the complexity of the arrangements that may be in
place. Complexity in relation to the supply chain is particularly important to consider when
determining what communication processes need to be in place – this can relate to the number and
type of different manufacturers in the supply chain, the degree of outsourcing that is in place, the
geographic spread of the various actors in the supply chain, etc.
In cases where the MAH and the manufacturer are part of the same overall group of companies, it may
be sufficient to document, using SOPs, how the actual communication processes are expected to work.
This is as long as those SOPs are approved by both parties and as long as they are referred to within
the technical agreement between the parties. In other situations, where the MAH and the
manufacturer are not part of the same overall group of companies, the communication processes and
responsibilities should be documented in technical agreements or in contracts, as they may be more
complex and at a higher risk of failing.
The two-way flow of information between the parties is important, especially in the context of
proposed changes which may require variation applications or regulatory notifications to the competent
authority by the MAH. This is also the case with regard to suspected quality defects and potential
recall issues which may have been reported to one or other party, but not to both, and which may
need to be reported onwards to the competent authority. See also section 5.5.4 in relation to Quality
defects with investigational medicinal products.
Life-cycle Considerations:
Communication processes and systems should be maintained with care, extending over the product
life-cycle (e.g. during the licensing procedure, commercial manufacture, the fulfilment of regulatory
commitments, the submission and implementation of post-approval variations, etc.) or at least up until
the end of the relationship between the concerned parties. The MAH should ensure that communication
systems are in place which will enable it to keep abreast of all developments, changes and
commitments relating to the specific product of concern.
Communications with the Competent Authorities – MA Variations:
In relation to manufacturing-related MA variations, the MAH has a responsibility via Directive
2001/83/EC and Regulation 2019/6 to provide the competent authority with information on
amendments relative to the information submitted in the dossier. The Directive states that “The
marketing authorisation holder shall forthwith provide the national competent authority with any new
information which might entail the amendment of the particulars or documents referred to in Article
8(3), Articles 10, 10a, 10b and 11, or Article 32(5), or Annex I” (Ref. Directive 2001/83/EC, Article 23
(2)). Similar provisions are referred to in the Veterinary regulation, Regulation 2019/6, via Article
8(b), 18(1); 18(2) 58 (3), (10), 35, 42 and 43

-- 15 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 16/29
Some of these articles directly concern GMP-related information, such as Article 8(3) in Directive
2001/83/EC and Article 5 of Regulation 2019/6, which relates to, among other things, a description of
the manufacturing method and the control methods employed by the manufacturer.
Communications relating to Product Supply:
Robust and timely communications are important in other areas too, not only in ensuring the
regulatory compliance status of the product in the marketplace. In relation to ensuring the continued
supply of medicinal products for patients and animals, for example, communication processes between
MAHs, manufacturers and national competent authorities can play a pivotal role. See Section 5.6
below for further information on this point.
Communications relating to Scientific Advances:
Another area in which effective communication processes can be of significant importance is in the
maintenance of MAs in line with scientific advances. Article 23 of Directive 2001/83/EC states that,
“after an authorisation has been issued, the authorisation holder must, in respect of the methods of
manufacture and control provided for in the application, take account of scientific and technical
progress and introduce any changes that may be required to enable the medicinal product to be
manufactured and checked by means of generally accepted scientific methods.” The Veterinary
Regulation 2019/6, has similar wording, via Article 58.
The above articles imply a responsibility of the MAH to have communication systems in place with
manufacturing sites and other parties which will enable it to keep abreast of scientific and technical
progress and advances and to discuss initiatives in this area. This is so that any necessary MA
variations can be submitted. This is further discussed in section 5.7 below.
Communicating Changes to CTD Modules 1, 2 and 3 / Parts 1 and 2 of Veterinary Marketing
Authorisation dossier to the Manufacturing Sites:
As CTD Modules 1, 2 and 3 / Parts 1 and 2 of the MA change over time with the approval of variations
and with the introduction of continual improvements, etc., it can be a challenge to retain knowledge at
both the MAH and at the manufacturer of what is registered at any one time.
• 	In this regard, it is expected that the copies of these CTD Modules / Parts 1 and 2 as held by the
MAH (and by the manufacturer, if applicable) are continually kept updated (by replacing individual
documents or Sections within a Module with the updated versions) as changes are made to those
documents or sections within that Module.
• 	This results in always having up-to-date copies of Modules 1, 2 and 3 / Parts 1 and 2 available as a
definitive record of what is registered.
• 	It can help avoid the need to maintain multiple different documents and document repositories to
capture what is registered at any point in time.
• 	Having such ‘live’ versions of Modules 1, 2 and 3 / Parts 1 and 2 in place can also facilitate
communications between the MAH and the manufacturer in relation to what is registered at any
point in time.
5.4. Product Quality Reviews (PQRs)
The area of product quality reviews is a topic that is of a direct relevance to MAHs. This is an area in
which the GMP Guide is quite prescriptive, in relation to what is expected of the MAH. Chapter 1 of the
Guide addresses this topic; and it states the following:
“The manufacturer and, where different, marketing authorisation holder should evaluate the
results of the review and an assessment made as to whether corrective and preventive action or
any revalidation should be undertaken, under the Pharmaceutical Quality System. There should be
management procedures for the ongoing management and review of these actions and the
effectiveness of these procedures verified during self-inspection. Quality reviews may be grouped
by product type, e.g. solid dosage forms, liquid dosage forms, sterile products, etc. where
scientifically justified.” (Ref. Chapter 1, Paragraph 1.11).

-- 16 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 17/29
The GMP Guide goes on to state that “Where the marketing authorisation holder is not the
manufacturer, there should be a technical agreement in place between the various parties that defines
their respective responsibilities in producing the product quality review.” (Ref. Chapter 1, Paragraph
1.11).
There are several important points in the above text which are useful to consider.
• 	The first is a clear obligation on the MAH, when it is not the product manufacturer, to evaluate the
results of the PQR and to make an assessment in relation to the need for corrective and preventive
actions (CAPAs), and revalidation activities. The text requires both parties to do the above
evaluation and assessment work.
• 	The second is the importance that the GMP Guide places on this PQR evaluation and assessment
work by both parties. This is evident from the requirement in Chapter 1 to apply oversight to
those activities, and in two different ways –ongoing management review and self-inspection
processes.
• 	Lastly, it is clear from the reference to a technical agreement above that each party has
responsibilities in relation to PQR activities. In the case of the MAH, the primary responsibility is to
perform the PQR evaluation and assessment work that is referred to above.
Given the importance that the GMP Guide attributes to the involvement of both parties in such work, it
is not considered appropriate for the MAH to delegate its evaluation and assessment work to the
manufacturer. There are several good and risk-based reasons for this.
• 	Firstly, there is information to be included and evaluated in PQRs which may be spread across
both parties, the MAH and the manufacturer, or primarily held by only one. This includes
information concerning complaints (and their investigation), as well as quality-related returns,
recalls, MA variations (in terms of their status – submitted, granted or refused), and post-
marketing commitments.
• 	Secondly, there are items to be reviewed in a PQR for which both parties may have had different
roles. An example here is the product stability data. The MAH may have outsourced the storage
and/or testing of the stability samples to a third party, such as a contract laboratory, which is not
the product manufacturer, and the results of the testing may be sent to the MAH, and not directly
to the manufacturer by the laboratory. In such a situation, the MAH would have an important role
in ensuring that the relevant stability data are included in the PQR and that the data are subject to
an adequate review.
The evaluation and assessment of such PQR information by both parties (the MAH and the
manufacturer) is important in another way too - it can help mitigate two key risks:
a) The risk of producing PQRs which are incomplete and which are missing important signals, trends
and learnings, and
b) The risk of placing batches of a product on the market which are non-compliant with the
requirements of the MA.
For example, the MAH may have information which the manufacturer may not necessarily have about
the required implementation date of a MA variation concerning the package leaflet, submitted to
update the leaflet with certain new safety information about the product.
The MAH’s evaluation and assessment work on the PQR is beneficial because it has the potential to
verify compliance with the variation implementation requirements, not only via a review of the
variations section of the PQR, but also via a review of the change control section. The manufacturer’s
review gives a related opportunity, to review the status of approved product artwork-related MA
variations which were listed in the PQR by the MAH.
In order for an MAH to add value in relation to its PQR activities, it is considered that its role in relation
to PQRs should be different from thoat of the manufacturer. It is recognised that PQRs are documents
that are primarily generated by the product manufacturer, not the MAH. Most of the information and

-- 17 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 18/29
data that needs to be included and reviewed in a PQR is firmly in the realm of GMP, and usually resides
at manufacturing sites, not at the MAHs. (This includes information relating to change controls,
process deviations, rejected batches, critical in-process controls, etc.)
There are several ways in which MAHs may add value in relation to PQRs:
• 	The MAH can ensure that information that it holds which is relevant to the PQR is actually included
in the PQR. This applies, for example, to information relating to product complaints, which the
MAH may have received directly from the marketplace and which may not have been also been
sent directly to the manufacturer, as well as information about product recalls, MA variations and
other changes, as well as post-marketing commitments. The manufacturer may have some of the
above information, but it may not possess all of it, and the MAH can ensure that the contents of
the PQR report in these areas are complete.
• 	The MAH can cross-check the information included in the PQR by the manufacturer against its own
records, in order to check whether there are any gaps in the data held by the manufacturer which
need to be addressed.
• 	The MAH can review the change control section of the PQR to check that changes with a potential
impact on regulatory compliance have been adequately managed.
• 	The MAH can ensure that its evaluation of the results of the PQR is focussed on assessing the MA
compliance status of the product during the review period, instead of focussing on areas for which
the MAH may not have a high level of competency or expertise, such as in relation to analytical
method changes, the adequacy of equipment-related corrective actions, and the qualification
status of relevant equipment and utilities, e.g. HVAC (heating, ventilation and air conditioning),
water, compressed gases, etc.
Overall, an MAH’s involvement in PQR activities provides tangible benefits, and further information in
this regard is presented in Section 5.7 below, in relation to Continual Improvement Activities.
Experience has shown that, when MAHs are not involved in the evaluation and assessment of PQR data
and reports, those PQRs appear to be at greater risk of not complying with the requirements of
Chapter 1 of the GMP Guide, and, more importantly, batches in the marketplace may be at greater risk
of having MA non-compliances associated with them.
5.5. Quality Defects, Complaints and Product Recalls
Chapter 8 of the GMP Guide deals with the above topics. In many companies, the management of
complaints, quality defects and recalls is performed centrally within the organisation, and Chapter 8
makes provision for this. It states that “the relative roles and responsibilities of the concerned parties
should be documented” and that such central management “should not result in delays in the
investigation and management of the issue.” (Ref. Chapter 8, Paragraph 8.4).
MAH Contact Person:
It is considered that the MAH should be satisfied with the centralised arrangements that are in place
for handling quality defects, such as within corporate quality groups or at manufacturing site(s). This
includes arrangements regarding the contact persons who may communicate quality defect issues to
the competent authorities (and the EMA in the case of products authorised via the Centralised
Procedure.) Note that a Qualified Person may be designated by the MAH as the contact person. It is
important to also note that the applicant/MAH is expected to have a dedicated responsible person to
serve as a contact person for product defects and recalls in the post-authorisation phase – in this
regard, the applicant/MAH is expected to provide information on its contact person in the MA-
application form (Ref. MA Application Form in Notice to Applicants Volume 2B, Article 6 of Regulation
726/2004, Annex I to Directive 2001/83/EC, Volume 6B of the Notice to Applicants, and Annex II of
Regulation 6/2019.)
Arrangements for Dealing with Quality Defects and Recalls:
Chapter 8 places obligations on the MAH, the manufacturer and other parties to define and agree their
respective roles and responsibilities with regard to quality defective medicinal products. In this

-- 18 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 19/29
context, the outsourcing of manufacturing and other activities is of relevance here, as outsourcing is
often an activity in which the MAH is directly involved.
Chapter 8 also recognises this, stating that “in case of outsourced activities, a contract should describe
the role and responsibilities of the manufacturer, the marketing authorisation holder and/or sponsor
and any other relevant third parties in relation to assessment, decision-making, and dissemination of
information and implementation of risk-reducing actions relating to a defective product.” It clarifies
that such contracts “should also address how to contact those responsible at each party for the
management of quality defect and recall issues. (Ref. Chapter 8, Principle).
Notification of Quality Defects to Competent Authorities:
There are obligations stated in Chapter 8 which relate to the notification of quality defects to the
relevant competent authority, and these are linked with the requirement to notify competent
authorities of potential supply restrictions and/or product recall as a consequence of quality defect
issues. The MAH often has a direct interest in such notification processes, and it is named in Chapter 8
as a party to such notifications. Chapter 8 states that “Quality defects should be reported in a timely
manner by the manufacturer to the marketing authorisation holder/sponsor and all concerned
Competent Authorities in cases where the quality defect may result in the recall of the product or in an
abnormal restriction in the supply of the product.” (Ref. Chapter 8, Paragraph 8.15).
Quality Defects with Investigational Medicinal Products:
Chapter 8 also addresses situations in which quality defects may occur in investigational medicinal
products, and these can also be of relevance to MAHs. The text here states that “In the case of an
investigational medicinal product for which a marketing authorisation has been issued, the
manufacturer of the investigational medicinal product should, in cooperation with the sponsor, inform
the marketing authorisation holder of any quality defect that could be related to the authorised
medicinal product.” (Ref. Chapter 8, Paragraph 8.24). This requirement is taken directly from Article
13 of GMP Directive 2003/94/EC for medicinal products and investigational medicinal products for
human use, which carries almost identical wording. (Note that there is no equivalent article in the GMP
Directive for veterinary medicines.)
Potentially Falsified Medicines & Reporting Requirements:
With regard to medicinal products for human use, the Falsified Medicines Directive (FMD), 2011/62/EU,
discussed in detail in Section 6, placed specific reporting obligations on manufacturers in relation to
products suspected of being falsified. This is relevant to the topic of quality defects, complaints and
recalls, as falsified medicines are considered defective medicines and they can lead to recall actions.
In amending Directive 2001/83/EC with the addition of Article 46 (g), the FMD Directive introduced a
responsibility for the manufacturer to inform the competent authority and the MAH immediately of
information which indicates that a medicinal product within the scope of its manufacturing
authorisation is, or is suspected of being, falsified. (This is required irrespective of whether the
medicinal product was distributed within the legal supply chain or by illegal means, including illegal
sale via information society services.)
The above responsibilities imply that the MAH should have a system in place to receive such quality
defect and product falsification reports from manufacturers and it should be able to respond to them in
a manner that is appropriate. This is also linked with the requirements of the EU pharmacovigilance
legislation, by which the MAH is obliged to have systems in place to deal with adverse reaction reports.
Product Recall Management:
The management of product recalls is a specific area of importance for the MAH to have robust
procedures in. This is because the MAH is usually heavily involved in recall decision making with the
national competent authorities and in the coordination of recalls, when they are required. Chapter 8
states that the “effectiveness of the arrangements in place for recalls should be periodically evaluated
to confirm that they remain robust and fit for use.” It requires such evaluations to “extend to both
within office-hour situations as well as out-of-office hour situations” and, when performing such
evaluations, it requires consideration to be given “as to whether mock-recall actions should be
performed.” It also requires such evaluations to be “documented and justified.” (Ref. Chapter 8,
Paragraph 8.30).

-- 19 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 20/29
Each of these requirements is applicable to the MAH, given the MAH’s role in recall decision making,
coordination and management, and it is important that the MAH has systems in place to deal with
these activities.
Other Notification Responsibilities:
Directive 2001/83/EC also contains provisions in this area that concern the MAH. Article 123 of the
Directive, for example, places an obligation upon the MAH to “notify the Member States concerned
forthwith of any action taken by the MAH to suspend the marketing of a medicinal product, to withdraw
a medicinal product from the market, to request the withdrawal of a marketing authorisation or not to
apply for the renewal of a marketing authorisation, together with the reasons for such action.” (Ref.
Directive 2001/83/EC, Article 123).
Note that, in relation to veterinary medicinal products, Regulation 2019/6 	contains a similar (but not
identical) provision. It states: “The marketing authorisation holder shall record in the product
database the dates when its authorised veterinary medicinal products are placed on the market,
information on the availability for each veterinary medicinal product in each relevant Member State
and, as applicable, the dates of any suspension or revocation of the marketing authorisations
concerned. […] The marketing authorisation holder shall without delay inform the competent authority
which has granted the marketing authorisation or the Commission, as applicable, of any prohibition or
restriction imposed by a competent authority or by an authority of a third country and of any other
new information which might influence the assessment of the benefits and risks of the veterinary
medicinal product concerned, including from the outcome of the signal management process carried
out in accordance with Article 81. […] The marketing authorisation holder shall without delay inform
the competent authority which has granted the marketing authorisation, or the Commission, as
applicable, of any action which the holder intends to take in order to cease the marketing of a
veterinary medicinal product prior to taking such action, together with the reasons for such action..”
(Ref. Regulation 2019/6, Articles 58 (6), (10) and (13)).
Article 123 of Directive 2001/83/EC also requires the MAH to declare if such action is based on any of
the grounds set out in Article 116 or Article 117(1). These articles relate to situations in which a view
is taken by Member States that “the medicinal product is harmful or that it lacks therapeutic efficacy,
or that the risk-benefit balance is not favourable, or that its qualitative and quantitative composition is
not as declared.” They also relate to situations in which “the controls on the medicinal product and/or
on the ingredients and the controls at an intermediate stage of the manufacturing process have not
been carried out or if some other requirement or obligation relating to the grant of the manufacturing
authorisation has not been fulfilled.”
5.6. Maintenance of Supply of Medicinal Products
The MAH’s Obligation to Ensure Continued Supply:
The EU medicines legislation, as well as the GMP Guide, place obligations upon the MAH that relate to
the supply of its medicinal products and to the maintenance of such supply. For example, Article 81 of
Directive 2001/83/EC states the following:
“The holder of a marketing authorisation for a medicinal product and the distributors of the
said medicinal product actually placed on the market in a Member State shall, within the limits
of their responsibilities, ensure appropriate and continued supplies of that medicinal product to
pharmacies and persons authorised to supply medicinal products so that the needs of patients
in the Member State in question are covered.”
For veterinary medicinal products, Regulation 2019/6 (Article 58 (2)) states the following:
“The marketing authorisation holder shall, within the limits of its responsibilities, ensure
appropriate and continued supplies of its veterinary medicinal products.”
This directly relates to the avoidance of medicines shortages for patients and animals.
It is considered that MAHs should also comply with any national requirements that may exist within the
EEA in relation to maintaining product supply.

-- 20 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 21/29
Reporting Supply Restrictions and Problems:
In addition, in accordance with Chapter 5 of the GMP Guide, the MAH has a responsibility to report
restrictions in supply to the relevant competent authorities. In this regard, the MAH may have to rely
upon the manufacturer to notify it of potential supply problems. Chapter 5 states that “The
manufacturer should report to the marketing authorisation holder (MAH) any constraints in
manufacturing operations which may result in abnormal restriction in the supply. This should be done
in a timely manner to facilitate reporting of the restriction in supply by the MAH, to the relevant
competent authorities, in accordance with its legal obligations.” (Ref. Chapter 5, Paragraph 5.71)
It is useful to consider what actions may be taken by the MAH in order to minimise the impact on
patients as a result of potential supply issues with their medicines.
• 	At a starting point, it is considered that the MAH should ensure that the communication
arrangements between it and the manufacturer on potential supply issues are agreed and clearly
documented in a technical agreement between the parties.
• 	Where the two companies are part of the same overall organisation, the specific details in relation
to how the communications processes are intended to work at a practical level may be documented
in SOPs, as long as those SOPs are approved by both parties and as long as they are referred to
within the technical agreement between the parties.
In addition to information from the internal supply chain, alerts on supply problems issued by e.g.
wholesalers, pharmacies and hospitals should also be considered by the MAH.
• 	This can help the MAH fulfil its notification obligations to the relevant competent authorities.
(Note: The MAH may delegate tasks regarding such notification obligations concerning supply
issues to the local affiliate in a member state.)
There is European legislation in place which governs the notification of supply issues to the competent
authorities. If the product ceases to be placed on the market of a Member State, either temporarily or
permanently, the MAH is required, via Article 23a of Directive 2001/83/EC, to notify the competent
authority of that Member State. The Directive requires that such notifications shall, “other than in
exceptional circumstances, be made no less than two months before the interruption in the placing on
the market of the product.”
The MAH is also required to inform the competent authority of the reasons for such action in
accordance with Article 123(2) of the Directive. This article requires the MAH to notify the Member
States concerned forthwith “of any action taken by the MAH to suspend the marketing of a medicinal
product, to withdraw a medicinal product from the market, to request the withdrawal of a marketing
authorisation or not to apply for the renewal of a marketing authorisation, together with the reasons
for such action.”
Note that, in relation to veterinary medicinal products, Regulation 2019/6 (Article 58(13)) contains a
similar (but not identical) provision. It states: “The marketing authorisation holder shall without delay
inform the competent authority which has granted the marketing authorisation or the Commission, as
applicable, of any action which the holder intends to take in order to cease the marketing of a
veterinary medicinal product prior to taking such action, together with the reasons for such action.”
Possible Reasons for Supply Disruptions – Complexity, Outsourcing & Other Factors:
There is a variety of factors that may lead to disruptions of supply chains and product shortages for
patients and animals. The globalisation of manufacturing and distribution activities is one such factor;
it has contributed to the current situation in which many medicinal products are associated with highly
complex supply chains, and this level of complexity gives rise to increased risks of problems arising in
those supply chains. These can be difficult to resolve in a timely manner, because coupled with this is
the added complexity that extensive outsourcing of manufacturing operations brings. Taken together,
they can result in long lead times in manufacturing when crisis situations in the supply of medicines
occur.
There are many factors which can lead to product supply issues, and these can be quite diverse,
ranging from, for example, a lack of robustness in the supply chain of the active substance, to the poor
management of MA transfers between companies, resulting in the correct product artwork not being
available in a timely manner following such transfers. The movement of manufacturing processes

-- 21 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 22/29
between two sites can also be a factor if it is not planned and managed adequately, especially where
there are tight logistics associated with the manufacturing and supply chain activities.
Prevention of Product Shortages:
It is, therefore, important for MAHs to be proactive in their approach to supply chain management, in
order to try and prevent product shortages and to meet the obligation as set out in Article 81 of
Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 58 of Regulation 2019/6. In this regard, it is recommended that
MAHs carry out, in line with quality risk management principles, proactive and detailed risk
assessments of their manufacturing, regulatory and supply chain processes, and to work to address
any identified weaknesses in those areas. A number of useful industry guidance documents on
preventing (and reacting to) shortages of medicinal products have been published (e.g. by the ISPE
and PDA) and these documents provide useful guidance for MAHs in this area. Note that in addition to
proactively preventing shortages, MAHs are encouraged also to have a risk management protocol in
place, should a supply disruption occur, to mitigate its impact.
It is worth noting that the ICH Guideline on Quality Risk Management (Q9) refers to product availability
risks, and in that context, it links such risks with the potential for patient harm. This is an important
point to take account of when working to prevent and mitigate the risks of medicines shortages.
5.7. Continual Improvement Activities
Guidance on the need for continual improvement activities was introduced into the GMP Guide in 2013,
when Chapter 1 was revised to align it with the concepts and terminology described in the ICH Q10
tripartite guideline on the Pharmaceutical Quality System.
Chapter 1 states that a Pharmaceutical Quality System appropriate for the manufacture of medicinal
products should ensure that “Continual improvement is facilitated through the implementation of
quality improvements appropriate to the current level of process and product knowledge” (Ref. Chapter
1, Paragraph 1.4(xi)). This is relevant to the MAH in several ways, including PQR activities, where the
MAH’s involvement in PQRs provides tangible benefits.
For example, the responsibility that the MAH has to evaluate the results of PQRs provides it with
process and product knowledge which it may not have had before then. This can help the MAH identify,
with its manufacturing site partners, the need for specific continual improvement activities to be
initiated.
PQR data can also enable the MAH to identify the need for improvement in its own regulatory affairs
processes that operate in conjunction with the manufacturing sites. Examples here include the
management of MA variations (relating to CTD Module 3 / Notice to Applicants Part 2) of the MA
dossier, the support that the MAH provides manufacturing sites in relation to site change control
activities (via the provision of regulatory impact assessments for specific change control proposals),
amongst others.
Scientific Advances:
The concept of continual improvement in medicines manufacturing is related to advances in science.
Articles 23 and 58 (3) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Regulation 2019/6, respectively, require MAHs to
maintain MAs in line with scientific advances. Article 23 states that, after an authorisation has been
issued, “the authorisation holder must, in respect of the methods of manufacture and control” provided
for in the marketing authorisation application, take account of “scientific and technical progress and
introduce any changes that may be required to enable the medicinal product to be manufactured and
checked by means of generally accepted scientific methods”. Article 58 (3) of the Veterinary
Regulation has similar wording.
• 	The above requirements place a responsibility on the MAH to work with the manufacturing sites in
order to incorporate generally accepted scientific methods into the registered methods of
manufacture and the registered controls.
• 	The MAH also has the responsibility to ensure that any variation applications which may be
required in light of the above changes, are submitted to keep the marketing authorisation up-to-
date.

-- 22 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 23/29
• 	This means that, for the manufacturing process, the process description as included in CTD Module
3 / Notice to Applicants Part 2 should be updated, where necessary, to include sufficient details
according to current guidelines. In some cases, consideration should also be given to updating the
manufacturing process itself.
It is considered also that, with regard to Article 23 of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 58 (3) of
Regulation 2019/6, a company’s internal manufacturing documents which describe the manufacturing
process should be kept updated in light of scientific and technical progress and that they contain
sufficiently detailed information so as to ensure that key manufacturing details are not lost when site
transfers occur.
Regarding updates to the methods of control, the MAH is required to ensure that material and product
specifications registered in the MA include tests according to the current pharmacopoeia and quality
guidelines, and analytical methods should be able to detect/quantify relevant impurities to ICH and
VICH thresholds.
In cases where a Ph. Eur. monograph is revised in line with scientific advances to control an active
substance, it can be useful for an MAH to work with the manufacturing sites and consider the need for
early testing of the substance in question according to the draft revised monograph, and to submit
comments on the draft monograph to the EDQM, if necessary. Such activities involving the MAH and
manufacturer could be described in a technical agreement.
Other References to Continual Improvement:
There are other references to continual improvement in the GMP Guide also which have relevance for
the MAH. For example, Chapter 7, on Outsourcing, states that “the Contract Giver should monitor and
review the performance of the Contract Acceptor and the identification and implementation of any
needed improvement” (Ref. Chapter 7, Paragraph 7.7). This places a responsibility upon the MAH to
perform such review and monitoring activities in cases when it is a contact giver for an outsourced
operation involving medicines manufacturing. It is considered that part of this responsibility may be
fulfilled through an MAH’s evaluation and assessment of the results of PQRs, as PQR data can be
indicative of the performance of a manufacturer in the manufacture of a product.
Updating Manufacturing Processes in line with Changes to the EU GMP Guide:
Finally, it is important to note that the MAH has some responsibility in ensuring that updates to the
GMP guide are incorporated at manufacturing site level. This is because, in Directive 2001/83/EC,
Annex I, it is stated that “the manufacturing process shall comply with the requirements of Directive
91/356/EEC [since replaced in 2003 by Directive 2003/94/EC] laying down the principles and
guidelines of GMP for medicinal products for human use and with the principles and guidelines on GMP,
published by the Commission in the rules governing medicinal products in the EC, Volume 4.” (It is
noted that the Veterinary Regulation 2019/6 has similar wording in Annex I and Annex II.)
The above relates to the manufacturing process as described in the MA, and as it is the MAH who seeks
to register the manufacturing process in the dossier, the above Annex I requirement places an
obligation upon the MAH to ensure that the registered manufacturing process is in line with current
GMP guidance. This is relevant in the context of continual improvement, because the GMP Guide
undergoes periodic improvement activities itself.
6. Falsified Medicines Directive (FMD)-related
Responsibilities
In relation to medicinal products for human use, where applicable, the MAH has a number of
responsibilities related to the Falsified Medicines Directive (FMD) 2011/62/EU and the related
Delegated Regulations (including the Safety Features Regulation 2016/161). 	One of those
responsibilities, as discussed in Section 5.2 of this Reflection Paper (Audits & Qualification Activities),
relates to the need to confirm the GMP status of the active substance manufacturer by means of GMP
audits. This responsibility is stated in Article 8(ha) of Directive 2001/83/EC, which originated in the
FMD Directive.

-- 23 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 24/29
Safety Features:
Other FMD-related responsibilities concern safety features on product packaging:
• 	Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/161 sets out what is expected of the MAH in relation
to the upload to the repositories system of pack serialisation data, as well as responsibilities in
relation to the decommissioning of pack serialisation codes.
• 	Article 33 of this Regulation requires the MAH to ensure that the information of unique identifier
and various additional defined data about the medicinal product and its distribution are "uploaded
to the repositories system before the medicinal product is released for sale or distribution by the
manufacturer, and that it is kept up to date thereafter." (Note that the Q&A Document on the
Commission’s Website provides additional guidance in this area – see Q&A 4.5.)
It is considered that the QP who certifies batches prior to their release to the market should be
satisfied with the arrangements that have been put in place by the MAH for the upload of the safety
features data to the repositories system. (In relation to QP responsibilities in this general area, it is
useful to note that Annex 16 to the GMP Guide places a responsibility on the QP to ensure that the
following point is secured, that:
"In the case of medicinal products for human use intended to be placed on the market in the
Union, the safety features referred to in Article 54(o) of Directive 2001/83/EC, as amended,
have been affixed to the packaging, where appropriate." (Ref. Annex 16, Paragraph 1.7.21).
Annex 16 indicates that this task may be delegated to “appropriately trained personnel or third
parties”, and in this regard, the Annex recognises that the QP will “need to rely on the
pharmaceutical quality system” that is in place and it requires the QP to have “on-going
assurance that this reliance is well founded”. (Ref. Annex 16, Paragraph 1.7.)
It is considered that the transfer of the unique identifier (UI) data from the location where they were
generated until their upload to the European Hub is performed in a secure manner and in such as a
way that the integrity of data is not compromised.
The Repositories System & MAH Responsibilities:
The repositories system is expected to be established and managed by the MAHs (Ref. Paragraph 28 of
the preamble text of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/161). Article 32 of the Delegated Regulation sets
out the required structure of the repositories system – there should be a central information and data
router (known as the European Hub) and repositories which serve the territory of one or multiple
Member States. Those repositories are required to be connected to the EU-Hub. The European
Medicines Verification Organisation (EMVO) is the organisation representing stakeholders who have
taken responsibility for the formation of the European Medicines Verification System (EMVS/EU-Hub).
Each EU Member State is expected to implement a National Medicines Verification System (NMVS)
which will be set up and managed by a National Medicines Verification Organisation (NMVO). The MAHs
are expected to liaise with both the EMVO and the relevant NMVOs for the concerned products.
Various items of information are required to be uploaded to the repositories system, including:
• 	The data elements of the unique identifier;
• 	The coding scheme of the product code;
• 	The name and the common name of the medicinal product, the pharmaceutical form, the strength,
the pack type and the pack size;
• 	The Member State or Member States where the medicinal product is intended to be placed on the
market;
• 	The name and address of the manufacturer placing the safety features;
• 	A list of wholesalers who are designated by the MAH, by means of a written contract, to store and
distribute the products covered by the marketing authorisation on his behalf.
This and other information is intended to be stored in all of the national or supranational repositories
serving the territory of the Member State, or Member States, where the medicinal product bearing the

-- 24 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 25/29
UI is intended to be placed on the market for at least one year after the expiry date of the medicinal
product, or five years after the product has been released for sale or distribution, whichever is longer.
The same responsibility applies to persons responsible for placing parallel imported or parallel
distributed medicinal products onto the market.
Serialisation Data - Uploading Responsibilities:
The MAH may delegate the uploading of the information laid down in Article 33(2) to a third party;
such delegation is expected to be documented in a written agreement between both parties. It is
important to note that the MAH may subcontract, or delegate, data uploading only to parties which
perform the data upload by means of infrastructure, hardware and software, which is physically located
within the EEA. Importantly, the MAH remains legally responsible for such tasks, as stated in the
document titled ‘Safety Features For Medicinal Products For Human Use; Questions And Answers’,
available on the European Commission’s website.
Unique Identifier Decommissioning Responsibilities:
In relation to decommissioning, which is a term that relates to various pack statuses within the
repositories, including the pack status called ‘supplied’, it is an MAH responsibility according to Article
40 of the Delegated Regulation to ensure the decommissioning of pack codes in the case of a product
recall or withdrawal. Article 40 states that “the marketing authorisation holder shall promptly take all
the following measures:
(a) ensure the decommissioning of the unique identifier of a medicinal product which is to be recalled
or withdrawn, in every national or supranational repository serving the territory of the Member State
or Member States in which the recall or the withdrawal is to take place;
(b) ensure the decommissioning of the unique identifier, where known, of a medicinal product which
has been stolen, in every national or supranational repository in which information on that product is
stored;
(c) indicate in the repositories referred to in points (a) and (b) that that product has been recalled or
withdrawn or stolen, where applicable.”
The same responsibility applies to persons responsible for placing parallel imported or parallel
distributed medicinal products onto the market.
It is worth noting that “decommissioned” as such is not a status in the system; multiple statuses that
are different from “active” have been developed in the EMVS by EMVO, such as “RECALLED”,
“DESTROYED” or “STOLEN”. All of these are considered as “decommissioned”.
For the above responsibilities to be met by the MAH, it is considered that there should be robust
communication systems in place between the MAH and the manufacturer (or other third party) to
whom such tasks have been delegated. This is because the various data elements that must be
uploaded to the repositories system may be held by the different entities – the manufacturer will likely
hold the actual pack serialisation codes per batch, while the MAH may hold the information about the
wholesalers which have been designated by it to store and distribute the product, as well as
information about the distribution of free medical samples and about product recall actions.
7. Conclusion
The EU Guide to GMP refers in several places to MAH companies and their responsibilities in relation to
GMP. Such responsibilities are spread over various chapters and annexes of the Guide, and are quite
numerous. There are also various GMP-related responsibilities for MAHs stated in applicable medicines
legislation. There appears, however, to be a lack of clarity and understanding as to what these
responsibilities actually are in their totality, and what they mean for MAHs, especially at a practical
level. Thus, it was considered that it would be of benefit to MAHs (and also to manufacturers, GMP
Inspectors and other stakeholders) if these responsibilities were documented in one place and
adequately explained. This Reflection Paper seeks to address this.

-- 25 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 26/29
While it is recognised that many MAH companies are not directly engaged in the manufacture of
medicinal products themselves, GMP is an area that has direct relevance for them. Indeed, it is of
interest that the GMP Guide states the following: “…the ultimate responsibility for the performance of a
medicinal product over its lifetime, its safety, quality and efficacy, lies with the marketing authorisation
holder”. A significant part of the performance of a medicinal product relates to compliance with the
GMP requirements during product manufacturing.
This Reflection Paper sets out what the various responsibilities for MAHs are and it seeks to explain
their practical implications. It essentially seeks to present a more complete picture of the regulatory
environment with respect to GMP in which the MAH operates. It groups the responsibilities under a
number of different themes; this is in an effort to illustrate the general areas in which the
responsibilities lie, and to provide a holistic view of them. It is intended that this Reflection Paper will
provide increased clarity for MAHs in this area, and that it will serve as a useful resource for MAHs
when designing (or reviewing) their internal systems as well as their interactions with manufacturing
sites.
Overall, this Reflection Paper is intended to be of assistance to MAHs as they work with the product
manufacturers and other stakeholders to facilitate compliance of the medicines placed on the market,
in terms of GMP and the MA. This ultimately serves the interests of patients and animals, as it
contributes to ensuring the availability of high quality, safe and effective medicines.
8. References
The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union Volume 4 Good Manufacturing Practice
Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use
https://ec.europa.eu/health/documents/eudralex/vol-4_en
The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union Volume 2B Presentation and Content of
the Dossier (Human Medicinal Products)
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/files/eudralex/vol-2/b/update_200805/ctd_05-
2008_en.pdf
The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union Volume 6B Presentation and Content of
Application Dossier (Veterinary Medicinal Products)
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/files/eudralex/vol-6/b/nta_volume_6b_2015_.pdf
Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on
the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use. (Consolidated version :
16/11/2012) http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:02001L0083-
20121116&qid=1472567249742&from=EN
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol-
1/dir_2001_83_consol_2012/dir_2001_83_cons_2012_en.pdf
Regulation (EU) 2019/6 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on
veterinary medicinal products and repealing Directive 2001/82/EC. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32019R0006&from=EN
Commission Directive 2003/94/EC of 8 October 2003 laying down the principles and guidelines of good
manufacturing practice in respect of medicinal products for human use and investigational medicinal
products for human use
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:262:0022:0026:en:PDF
Directive 1991/412/EEC of 23 July 1991 laying down the principles and guidelines of good
manufacturing practice for veterinary medicinal products
https://ec.europa.eu/health//sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol-
5/dir_1991_412/dir_1991_412_en.pdf
Commission Directive (EU) 2017/1572 of 15 September 2017 supplementing Directive 2001/83/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the principles and guidelines of good
manufacturing practice for medicinal products for human use
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2017/1572/oj

-- 26 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 27/29
Directive 2011/62/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2011 amending
Directive 2001/83/EC on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use, as regards
the prevention of the entry into the legal supply chain of falsified medicinal products
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:174:0074:0087:EN:PDF
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2016/161 of 2 October 2015 supplementing Directive
2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council by laying down detailed rules for the safety
features appearing on the packaging of medicinal products for human use (OJ L 32, 9.2.2016, p. 1-27)
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol-
1/reg_2016_161/reg_2016_161_en.pdf
European Medicines Agency: EMA/196292/2014; Guidance for the template for the qualified person’s
declaration concerning GMP compliance of active substance manufacture “The QP declaration template”
http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Regulatory_and_procedural_guideline/2014
/06/WC500167852.pdf
ICH Q10, Pharmaceutical Quality System, dated 4 June 2008
http://www.ich.org/fileadmin/Public_Web_Site/ICH_Products/Guidelines/Quality/Q10/Step4/Q10_Guid
eline.pdf
Final Concept Paper on ICH Q12: Technical and Regulatory Considerations for Pharmaceutical Product
Lifecycle Management, dated 28 July 2014, Endorsed by the ICH Steering Committee on 9 September
2014
http://www.ich.org/fileadmin/Public_Web_Site/ICH_Products/Guidelines/Quality/Q12/Q12_Final_Conce
pt_Paper_July_2014.pdf
ICH Q12, Technical and Regulatory Considerations for Pharmaceutical Product Lifecycle Management,
adopted 20 November 2019
https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/Q12_Guideline_Step4_2019_1119.pdf
Veterinary ICH Impurities Guidelines
http://www.vichsec.org/guidelines/pharmaceuticals/pharma-quality/impurities.html
PDA Technical Report No. 68 titled Risk-based Approach for Prevention and Management of Drug
Shortages, January 2015, available at https://store.pda.org/ProductCatalog/
ISPE Drug Shortages Prevention Plan, A Holistic View from Root Cause to Prevention, October 2014
https://www.ispe.org/sites/default/files/initiatives/drug-shortages/drug-shortages-prevention-plan.pdf
Prevention of Drug Shortages Based on Quality and Manufacturing Issues, Final report by the inter-
associations team with representatives from EFPIA / EGA / AESGP / PPTA, ISPE, and PDA, 23/12/2014
https://ispe.org/sites/default/files/initiatives/drug-shortages/prevention-drug-shortages-report-
ema.pdf
Guidelines of 5 November 2013 on Good Distribution Practice of medicinal products for human
(Text with EEA relevance) 2013/C 343/01
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv:OJ.C_.2013.343.01.0001.01.ENG&toc=OJ:C:2013:343:TOC
Compliance Management Procedure - Compilation of Union Procedures on Inspections and Exchange of
Information - revision 18 (europa.eu)
9. List of Abbreviations
ATMP 	Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products
ASMF 	Active Substance Master File

-- 27 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 28/29
CTD 	Common Technical Document
CAPA 	Corrective Actions and Preventive Actions
CEP 	Certificate of Suitability to the monographs of the European Pharmacopoeia
CHMP 	Committee for Medicinal Products for Human use
CMO 	Contract Manufacturing Organisation
EC 	European Commission
EDQM 	European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines
EMA 	European Medicines Agency
EEA 	European Economic Area
EMVO 	European Medicines Verification Organisation
EMVS 	European
EudraGMDP - the name for the Union database referred to in article 111(6) of Directive 2001/83/EC
and article 80(6) of Directive 2001/82/EC
EUDRA European Union Drug Regulatory Authority
FMD 	Falsified Medicines Directive (2011/62/EU)
GDP 	Good Distribution Practice
GMP 	Good Manufacturing Practice
GMDP 	Good Manufacturing Practice / Good Distribution Practice
HVAC 	Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
ISPE 	International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering
ICH 	International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for
Human Use
MA 	Marketing Authorisation
MAA 	Marketing Authorisation Application
MAH 	Marketing Authorisation Holder
MIA 	Manufacturing and Importation Authorisation
NMVS 	National Medicines Verification System
NMVO 	National Medicines Verification Organisation
PDA 	Parenteral Drug Association
PQR 	Product Quality Review
QP 	Qualified Person
PQS 	Pharmaceutical Quality System
QMS 	Quality Management System

-- 28 of 29 --

EMA/INS/3094/2022 	Page 29/29
RH 	Registration Holder
RP 	Responsible Person
SOP 	Standard Operating Procedure
TRH 	Traditional-use Registration Holder
UI 	Unique Identifier

-- 29 of 29 --

