[Source: 附件\2009_06_annex13.pdf]
[Format: EU GMP Regulation]

Commission Européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel – Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11
EUROPEAN COMMISSION
ENTERPRISE AND INDUSTRY DIRECTORATE-GENERAL
Consumer goods
Pharmaceuticals
Brussels, 03 February 2010
ENTR/F/2/AM/an D(2010) 3374
EudraLex
The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union
Volume 4
EU Guidelines to
Good Manufacturing Practice
Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use
Annex 13
Investigational Medicinal Products
Document History
Revision 	to 	reinforce 	the 	principle 	of 	independence 	between
production and quality control functions in cases where the number
of personnel involved is small.
Changes to sections 36 and 37 to supplement, for investigational
medicinal products, the guidance for reference and retention samples
given in Annex 19.
An additional note has been introduced to clarify the meaning of
“reconstitution” as referred to in article 9.2 of Directive 2005/28/EC.
The content of the Batch Certificate referred to in Art. 13(3) of
Directive 	2001/20/EC, 	agreed 	following 	a 	separate 	public
consultation, has been added as an attachment.
A few editorial changes have been made to sections not consulted
upon in the interests of updating references and consistency with
terminology used throughout the GMP Guide.
February 2008
Public consultation April 2008 until
January 2009
Adopted by the European Commission 	31 January 2010
Deadline for coming into operation 	31 July 2010

-- 1 of 19 --

PRINCIPLE
Investigational medicinal products should be produced in accordance with the principles and
the detailed guidelines of Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products (The Rules
Governing Medicinal Products in The European Community, Volume IV). Other guidelines
published by the European Commission should be taken into account where relevant and as
appropriate to the stage of development of the product. Procedures need to be flexible to
provide for changes as knowledge of the process increases, and appropriate to the stage of
development of the product.
In clinical trials there may be added risk to participating subjects compared to patients treated
with marketed products. The application of GMP to the manufacture of investigational
medicinal products is intended to ensure that trial subjects are not placed at risk, and that the
results of clinical trials are unaffected by inadequate safety, quality or efficacy arising from
unsatisfactory manufacture. Equally, it is intended to ensure that there is consistency between
batches of the same investigational medicinal product used in the same or different clinical
trials, and that changes during the development of an investigational medicinal product are
adequately documented and justified.
The 	production 	of 	investigational 	medicinal 	products 	involves 	added 	complexity 	in
comparison to marketed products by virtue of the lack of fixed routines, variety of clinical
trial designs, consequent packaging designs, and the need, often, for randomisation and
blinding and increased risk of product cross-contamination and mix up. Furthermore, there
may be incomplete knowledge of the potency and toxicity of the product and a lack of full
process validation, or, marketed products may be used which have been re-packaged or
modified in some way. These challenges require personnel with a thorough understanding of,
and training in, the application of GMP to investigational medicinal products. Co-operation is
required with trial sponsors who undertake the ultimate responsibility for all aspects of the
clinical trial including the quality of investigational medicinal products. The increased
complexity in manufacturing operations requires a highly effective quality system.
The Annex also includes guidance on ordering, shipping, and returning clinical supplies,
which are at the interface with, and complementary to, guidelines on Good Clinical Practice.
Notes
Non-investigational medicinal product 1
Products other than the test product, placebo or comparator may be supplied to subjects
participating in a trial. Such products may be used as support or escape medication for
preventative, diagnostic or therapeutic reasons and/or needed to ensure that adequate medical
care is provided for the subject. They may also be used in accordance with the protocol to
induce a physiological response. These products do not fall within the definition of
investigational medicinal products and may be supplied by the sponsor, or the investigator.
The sponsor should ensure that they are in accordance with the notification/request for
authorisation to conduct the trial and that they are of appropriate quality for the purposes of
the trial taking into account the source of the materials, whether or not they are the subject of
1 Further information can be found in the European Commission’s Guidance on Investigational Medicinal
Products (IMPs) and other Medicinal Products used in Clinical Trials

-- 2 of 19 --

a 	marketing 	authorisation 	and 	whether 	they 	have 	been 	repackaged. 	The 	advice 	and
involvement of a Qualified Person is recommended in this task.
Manufacturing authorisation and reconstitution
Both the total and partial manufacture of investigational medicinal products, as well as the
various processes of dividing up, packaging or presentation, is subject to the authorisation
referred to in Article 13(1) Directive 2001/20/EC, cf. Article 9(1) Directive 2005/28/EC. This
authorisation, however, shall not be required for reconstitution under the conditions set out in
Article 9(2) Directive 2005/28/EC. For the purpose of this provision, reconstitution shall be
understood as a simple process of:
• 	dissolving or dispersing the investigational medicinal product for administration of the
product to a trial subject,
• 	or, 	diluting 	or 	mixing 	the 	investigational 	medicinal 	product(s) 	with 	some 	other
substance(s) used as a vehicle for the purposes of administering it,
Reconstitution is not mixing several ingredients, including the active substance, together to
produce the investigational medicinal product.
An 	investigational 	medicinal 	product 	must 	exist 	before 	a 	process 	can 	be 	defined 	as
reconstitution.
The 	process 	of 	reconstitution 	has 	to 	be 	undertaken 	as 	soon 	as 	practicable 	before
administration.
This process has to be defined in the clinical trial application / IMP dossier and clinical trial
protocol, or related document, available at the site.
G LOSSARY
Blinding
A procedure in which one or more parties to the trial are kept unaware of the treatment
assignment(s). Single-blinding usually refers to the subject(s) being unaware, and double-
blinding usually refers to the subject(s), investigator(s), monitor, and, in some cases, data
analyst(s) being unaware of the treatment assignment(s). In relation to an investigational
medicinal product, blinding shall mean the deliberate disguising of the identity of the product
in accordance with the instructions of the sponsor. Unblinding shall mean the disclosure of
the identity of blinded products.
Clinical trial
Any 	investigation 	in 	human 	subjects 	intended 	to 	discover 	or 	verify 	the 	clinical,
pharmacological and/or other pharmacodynamic effects of an investigational product(s)
and/or to identify any adverse reactions to an investigational product(s), and/or to study
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of one or more investigational medicinal
product(s) with the object of ascertaining its/their safety and/or efficacy.

-- 3 of 19 --

Comparator product
An investigational or marketed product (i.e. active control), or placebo, used as a reference in
a clinical trial.
Investigational medicinal product
A pharmaceutical form of an active substance or placebo being tested or used as a reference
in a clinical trial, including a product with a marketing authorisation when used or assembled
(formulated or packaged) in a way different from the authorised form, or when used for an
unauthorised indication, or when used to gain further information about the authorised form.
Investigator
A person responsible for the conduct of the clinical trial at a trial site. If a trial is conducted
by a team of individuals at a trial site, the investigator is the responsible leader of the team
and may be called the principal investigator.
Manufacturer/importer of Investigational Medicinal Products
Any person engaged in activities for which the authorisation referred to in Article 13(1) of
Directive 2001/20/EC is required.
Order
Instruction to process, package and/or ship a certain number of units of investigational
medicinal product(s).
Product Specification File
A reference file containing, or referring to files containing, all the information necessary to
draft the detailed written instructions on processing, packaging, quality control testing, batch
release and shipping of an investigational medicinal product.
Randomisation
The process of assigning trial subjects to treatment or control groups using an element of
chance to determine the assignments in order to reduce bias.
Randomisation Code
A listing in which the treatment assigned to each subject from the randomisation process is
identified.
Shipping
The operation of packaging for shipment and sending of ordered medicinal products for
clinical trials.
Sponsor
An individual, company, institution or organisation which takes responsibility for the
initiation, management and/or financing of a clinical trial.

-- 4 of 19 --

Q UALITY MANAGEMENT
1. 	The Quality System, designed, set up and verified by the manufacturer or importer,
should be described in written procedures available to the sponsor, taking into account
the GMP principles and guidelines applicable to investigational medicinal products.
2. 	The product specifications and manufacturing instructions may be changed during
development but full control and traceability of the changes should be maintained.
PERSONNEL
3. 	All personnel involved with investigational medicinal products should be appropriately
trained in the requirements specific to these types of product.
Even in cases where the number of staff involved is small, there should be, for each
batch, separate people responsible for production and quality control.
4. 	The Qualified Person should ensure that there are systems in place that meet the
requirements 	of 	GMP 	and 	should 	have 	a 	broad 	knowledge 	of 	pharmaceutical
development 	and 	clinical 	trial 	processes. 	Guidance 	for 	the 	Qualified 	Person 	in
connection with the certification of investigational medicinal products is given in
paragraphs 38 to 41.
PREMISES AND EQUIPMENT
5. 	The toxicity, potency and sensitising potential may not be fully understood for
investigational medicinal products and this reinforces the need to minimise all risks of
cross-contamination. The design of equipment and premises, inspection / test methods
and acceptance limits to be used after cleaning should reflect the nature of these risks.
Consideration should be given to campaign working where appropriate. Account
should be taken of the solubility of the product in decisions about the choice of
cleaning solvent.
DOCUMENTATION
Specifications and instructions
6. 	Specifications (for starting materials, primary packaging materials, intermediate, bulk
products and finished products), manufacturing formulae and processing and packaging
instructions should be as comprehensive as possible given the current state of
knowledge. They should be periodically re-assessed during development and updated
as necessary. Each new version should take into account the latest data, current
technology used, regulatory and pharmacopoeial requirements, and should allow
traceability to the previous document. Any changes should be carried out according to
a written procedure, which should address any implications for product quality such as
stability and bio equivalence.

-- 5 of 19 --

7. 	Rationales for changes should be recorded and the consequences of a change on
product quality and on any on-going clinical trials should be investigated and
documented2 .
Order
8. 	The order should request the processing and/or packaging of a certain number of units
and/or their shipping and be given by or on behalf of the sponsor to the manufacturer. It
should be in writing (though it may be transmitted by electronic means), and precise
enough to avoid any ambiguity. It should be formally authorised and refer to the
Product Specification File and the relevant clinical trial protocol as appropriate.
Product Specification File
9. 	The Product Specification File (see glossary) should be continually updated as
development of the product proceeds, ensuring appropriate traceability to the previous
versions. It should include, or refer to, the following documents:
• 	Specifications and analytical methods for starting materials, packaging materials;
• 	Intermediate, bulk and finished product;
• 	Manufacturing methods;
• 	In-process testing and methods;
• 	Approved label copy;
• 	Relevant clinical trial protocols and randomisation codes, as appropriate;
• 	Relevant technical agreements with contract givers, as appropriate;
• 	Stability data;
• 	Storage and shipment conditions.
The above listing is not intended to be exclusive or exhaustive. The contents will vary
depending on the product and stage of development. The information should form the
basis for assessment of the suitability for certification and release of a particular batch
by the Qualified Person and should therefore be accessible to him/her. Where different
manufacturing steps are carried out at different locations under the responsibility of
different Qualified Persons, it is acceptable to maintain separate files limited to
information of relevance to the activities at the respective locations.
Manufacturing Formulae and Processing Instructions
10. 	For every manufacturing operation or supply there should be clear and adequate written
instructions and written records. Where an operation is not repetitive it may not be
2 Guidance on changes that require the request of a substantial amendment to the IMP dossier submitted to the
Competent Authorities is given in the CHMP guideline on the Requirements to the Chemical and
Pharmaceutical Quality Documentation Concerning Investigational Medicinal Products in Clinical Trials

-- 6 of 19 --

necessary to produce Master Formulae and Processing Instructions. Records are
particularly important for the preparation of the final version of the documents to be
used in routine manufacture once the marketing authorisation is granted.
11. 	The information in the Product Specification File should be used to produce the
detailed written instructions on processing, packaging, quality control testing, storage
conditions and shipping.
Packaging Instructions
12. 	Investigational medicinal products are normally packed in an individual way for each
subject included in the clinical trial. The number of units to be packaged should be
specified prior to the start of the packaging operations, including units necessary for
carrying 	out 	quality 	control 	and 	any 	retention 	samples 	to 	be 	kept. 	Sufficient
reconciliations should take place to ensure the correct quantity of each product required
has been accounted for at each stage of processing.
Processing, testing and packaging batch records
13. 	Batch records should be kept in sufficient detail for the sequence of operations to be
accurately determined. These records should contain any relevant remarks which justify
the procedures used and any changes made, enhance knowledge of the product and
develop the manufacturing operations.
14. 	Batch manufacturing records should be retained at least for the periods specified in
Directive 2003/94/EC.
PRODUCTION
Packaging materials
15. 	Specifications and quality control checks should include measures to guard against
unintentional unblinding due to changes in appearance between different batches of
packaging materials.
Manufacturing operations
16. 	During development critical parameters should be identified and in-process controls
primarily used to control the process. Provisional production parameters and in-process
controls may be deduced from prior experience, including that gained from earlier
development work. Careful consideration by key personnel is called for in order to
formulate the necessary instructions and to adapt them continually to the experience
gained in production. Parameters identified and controlled should be justifiable based on
knowledge available at the time.
17. 	Production processes for investigational medicinal products are not expected to be
validated to the extent necessary for routine production but premises and equipment are
expected to be qualified. For sterile products, the validation of sterilising processes
should be of the same standard as for products authorised for marketing. 	Likewise,
when required, virus inactivation/removal and that of other impurities of biological
origin should be demonstrated, to assure the safety of biotechnologically derived

-- 7 of 19 --

products, by following the scientific principles and techniques defined in the available
guidance in this area.
18. 	Validation of aseptic processes presents special problems when the batch size is small; in
these cases the number of units filled may be the maximum number filled in production.
If practicable, and otherwise consistent with simulating the process, a larger number of
units should be filled with media to provide greater confidence in the results obtained.
Filling and sealing is often a manual or semi-automated operation presenting great
challenges to sterility so enhanced attention should be given to operator training, and
validating the aseptic technique of individual operators.
Principles applicable to comparator product
19. 	If a product is modified, data should be available (e.g. stability, comparative dissolution,
bioavailability) to demonstrate that these changes do not significantly alter the original
quality characteristics of the product.
20. 	The expiry date stated for the comparator product in its original packaging might not be
applicable to the product where it has been repackaged in a different container that may
not offer equivalent protection, or be compatible with the product. A suitable use-by
date, taking into account the nature of the product, the characteristics of the container
and the storage conditions to which the article may be subjected, should be determined
by or on behalf of the sponsor. Such a date should be justified and must not be later than
the expiry date of the original package. There should be compatibility of expiry dating
and clinical trial duration.
Blinding operations
21. 	Where products are blinded, systems should be in place to ensure that the blind is
achieved and maintained while allowing for identification of “blinded” products when
necessary, including the batch numbers of the products before the blinding operation.
Rapid identification of product should also be possible in an emergency.
Randomisation code
22. 	Procedures should describe the generation, security, distribution, handling and retention
of any randomisation code used for packaging investigational products, and code-break
mechanisms. Appropriate records should be maintained.
Packaging
23. 	During packaging of investigational medicinal products, it may be necessary to handle
different products on the same packaging line at the same time. The risk of product mix
up must be minimised by using appropriate procedures and/or, specialised equipment as
appropriate and relevant staff training.
24. 	Packaging and labelling of investigational medicinal products are likely to be more
complex and more liable to errors (which are also harder to detect) than for marketed
products, particularly when “blinded” products with similar appearance are used.
Precautions against mis-labelling such as label reconciliation, line clearance, in process
control checks by appropriately trained staff should accordingly be intensified.

-- 8 of 19 --

25. 	The packaging must ensure that the investigational medicinal product remains in good
condition during transport and storage at intermediate destinations. Any opening or
tampering of the outer packaging during transport should be readily discernible.
Labelling
26. 	Table 1 summarises the contents of Articles 26-30 that follow. Labelling should comply
with the requirements of Directive 2003/94/EC. The following information should be
included on labels, unless its absence can be justified, e.g. use of a centralised electronic
randomisation system:
(a) 	name, 	address 	and 	telephone 	number 	of 	the 	sponsor, 	contract 	research
organisation or investigator (the main contact for information on the product,
clinical trial and emergency unblinding);
(b) 	pharmaceutical dosage form, route of administration, quantity of dosage units,
and in the case of open trials, the name/identifier and strength/potency;
(c) 	the batch and/or code number to identify the contents and packaging operation;
(d) 	a trial reference code allowing identification of the trial, site, investigator and
sponsor if not given elsewhere;
(e) 	the trial subject identification number/treatment number and where relevant,
the visit number;
(f) 	the name of the investigator (if not included in (a) or (d));
(g) 	directions for use (reference may be made to a leaflet or other explanatory
document intended for the trial subject or person administering the product);
(h) 	“For clinical trial use only” or similar wording;
(i) 	the storage conditions;
(j) 	period of use (use-by date, expiry date or re-test date as applicable), in
month/year format and in a manner that avoids any ambiguity.
(k) 	“keep out of reach of children” except when the product is for use in trials
where the product is not taken home by subjects.
27. 	The address and telephone number of the main contact for information on the product,
clinical trial and for emergency unblinding need not appear on the label where the
subject has been given a leaflet or card which provides these details and has been
instructed to keep this in their possession at all times.
28. 	Particulars should appear in the official language(s) of the country in which the
investigational medicinal product is to be used. The particulars listed in Article 26
should appear on the primary packaging and on the secondary packaging (except for the
cases described in Articles 29 and 30). The requirements with respect to the contents of
the label on the primary and outer packaging are summarised in Table 1. Other
languages may be included.

-- 9 of 19 --

29. 	When the product is to be provided to the trial subject or the person administering the
medication within a primary package together with secondary packaging that is intended
to remain together, and the secondary packaging carries the particulars listed in
Paragraph 26, the following information shall be included on the label of the primary
package (or any sealed dosing device that contains the primary packaging):
(a) 	name of sponsor, contract research organisation or investigator;
(b) 	pharmaceutical dosage form, route of administration (may be excluded for oral
solid dose forms), quantity of dosage units and in the case of open label trials,
the name/identifier and strength/potency;
(c) 	batch and/or code number to identify the contents and packaging operation;
(d) 	a trial reference code allowing identification of the trial, site, investigator and
sponsor if not given elsewhere;
(e) 	the trial subject identification number/treatment number and where relevant,
the visit number.
30. 	If the primary packaging takes the form of blister packs or small units such as ampoules
on which the particulars required in Paragraph 26 cannot be displayed, secondary
packaging should be provided bearing a label with those particulars. The primary
packaging should nevertheless contain the following:
(a) 	name of sponsor, contract research organisation or investigator;
(b) 	route of administration (may be excluded for oral solid dose forms) and in the
case of open label trials, the name/identifier and strength/potency;
(c) 	batch and/or code number to identify the contents and packaging operation;
(d) 	a trial reference code allowing identification of the trial, site, investigator and
sponsor if not given elsewhere;
(e) 	the trial subject identification number/treatment number and where relevant,
the visit number;
31. 	Symbols or pictograms may be included to clarify certain information mentioned above.
Additional information, warnings and/or handling instructions may be displayed.
32. 	For 	clinical 	trials 	with 	the 	characteristics 	identified 	in 	Article 	14 	of 	Directive
2001/20/EC, the following particulars should be added to the original container but
should not obscure the original labelling:
i) name of sponsor, contract research organisation or investigator;
ii) trial reference code allowing identification of the trial site, investigator and trial
subject.
33. 	If it becomes necessary to change the use-by date, an additional label should be affixed
to the investigational medicinal product. This additional label should state the new use-
by date and repeat the batch number. It may be superimposed on the old use-by date, but
for quality control reasons, not on the original batch number. This operation should be

-- 10 of 19 --

performed at an appropriately authorised manufacturing site. However, when justified, it
may be performed at the investigational site by or under the supervision of the clinical
trial site pharmacist, or other health care professional in accordance with national
regulations. Where this is not possible, it may be performed by the clinical trial
monitor(s) who should be appropriately trained. The operation should be performed in
accordance with GMP principles, specific and standard operating procedures and under
contract, if applicable, and should be checked by a second person. This additional
labelling should be properly documented in both the trial documentation and in the batch
records.
QUALITY CONTROL
34. 	As processes may not be standardised or fully validated, testing takes on more
importance in ensuring that each batch meets its specification.
35. 	Quality control should be performed in accordance with the Product Specification File
and in accordance with the information notified pursuant to Article 9(2) of Directive
2001/20/EC. Verification of the effectiveness of blinding should be performed and
recorded.
36. 	Samples are retained to fulfill two purposes; firstly to provide a sample for analytical
testing and secondly to provide a specimen of the finished product. Samples may
therefore fall into two categories:
Reference sample: a sample of a batch of starting material, packaging material, product
contained in its primary packaging or finished product which is stored for the purpose of
being analysed should the need arise. Where stability permits, reference samples from
critical intermediate stages (e.g. those requiring analytical testing and release) or
intermediates, which are transported outside of the manufacturer’s control, should be
kept.
Retention sample: a sample of a packaged unit from a batch of finished product for each
packaging 	run/trial 	period. 	It 	is 	stored 	for 	identification 	purposes. 	For 	example,
presentation, packaging, labeling, leaflet, batch number, expiry date should the need
arise.
In many instances the reference and retention samples will be presented identically, i.e.
as fully packaged units. In such circumstances, reference and retention samples may be
regarded 	as 	interchangeable.Reference 	and 	retention 	samples 	of 	investigational
medicinal product, including blinded product should be kept for at least two years after
completion or formal discontinuation of the last clinical trial in which the batch was
used, whichever period is the longer.
Consideration should be given to keeping retention samples until the clinical report has
been prepared to enable confirmation of product identity in the event of, and as part of an
investigation into inconsistent trial results.
37. 	The storage location of Reference and Retention samples should be defined in a
Technical Agreement between the sponsor and manufacturer(s) and should allow timely
access by the competent authorities.

-- 11 of 19 --

Reference samples of finished product should be stored within the EEA or in a third
country where appropriate arrangements have been made by the Community with the
exporting country to ensure that the manufacturer of the investigational medicinal
product applies standards of good manufacturing practice at least equivalent to those laid
down by the Community. 	In exceptional circumstances the reference samples of the
finished product may be stored by the manufacturer in another third country, in which
case this should be justified, and documented in a technical agreement between the
sponsor, importer in the EEA and that third country manufacturer.
The reference sample should be of sufficient size to permit the carrying out, on, at least,
two occasions, of the full analytical controls on the batch in accordance with the IMP
dossier submitted for authorisation to conduct the clinical trial.
In the case of retention samples, it is acceptable to store information related to the final
packaging as written or electronic records if such records provide sufficient information.
In the case of the latter, the system should comply with the requirements of Annex 11.
RELEASE OF BATCHES
38. 	Release of investigational medicinal products (see paragraph 43) should not occur until
after the Qualified Person has certified that the requirements of Article 13.3 of Directive
2001/20/EC have been met (see paragraph 39). The Qualified Person should take into
account the elements listed in paragraph 40 as appropriate.
39. 	The duties of the Qualified Person in relation to investigational medicinal products are
affected by the different circumstances that can arise and are referred to below. Table 2
summarises the elements that need to be considered for the most common circumstances:
(a) 	i) Product manufactured within EU but not subject to an EU marketing
authorisation: 	the 	duties 	are 	laid 	down 	in 	article 	13.3(a) 	of 	Directive
2001/20/EC.
(b) 	ii) Product sourced from the open market within EU in accordance with Article
80(b) of Directive 2001/83/EC and subject to an EU marketing authorisation,
regardless of manufacturing origin: the duties are as described above, however,
the scope of certification can be limited to assuring that the products are in
accordance with the notification/request for authorisation to conduct the trial
and any subsequent processing for the purpose of blinding, trial-specific
packaging and labelling. The Product Specification File will be similarly
restricted in scope (see 9).
(c) 	Product imported directly from a 3rd country: the duties are laid down in
article 13.3(b) of Directive 2001/20/EC. Where investigational medicinal
products are imported from a 3rd country and they are subject to arrangements
concluded between the Community and that country, such as a Mutual
Recognition Agreement (MRA), equivalent standards of Good Manufacturing
Practice apply provided any such agreement is relevant to the product in
question. In the absence of an MRA, the Qualified Person should determine
that equivalent standards of Good Manufacturing Practice apply through
knowledge 	of 	the 	quality 	system 	employed 	at 	the 	manufacturer. 	This
knowledge is normally acquired through audit of the manufacturer’s quality

-- 12 of 19 --

systems. In either case, the Qualified Person may then certify on the basis of
documentation supplied by the 3rd country manufacturer (see 40).
(d) 	For 	imported 	comparator 	products 	where 	adequate 	assurance 	cannot 	be
obtained 	in 	order 	to 	certify 	that 	each 	batch 	has 	been 	manufactured 	to
equivalent standards of Good Manufacturing Practice, the duty of the Qualified
Person is defined in article 13.3(c) of Directive 2001/20/EC.
40. 	Assessment of each batch for certification prior to release may include as appropriate:
• 	batch records, including control reports, in-process test reports and release reports
demonstrating compliance with the product specification file, the order, protocol and
randomisation code. These records should include all deviations or planned changes,
and any consequent additional checks or tests, and should be completed and endorsed
by the staff authorised to do so according to the quality system;
• 	production conditions;
• 	the validation status of facilities, processes and methods;
• 	examination of finished packs;
• 	where relevant, the results of any analyses or tests performed after importation;
• 	stability reports;
• 	the source and verification of conditions of storage and shipment;
• 	audit reports concerning the quality system of the manufacturer;
• 	Documents 	certifying 	that 	the 	manufacturer 	is 	authorised 	to 	manufacture
investigational medicinal products or comparators for export by the appropriate
authorities in the country of export;
• 	where relevant, regulatory requirements for marketing authorisation, GMP standards
applicable and any official verification of GMP compliance;
• 	all other factors of which the QP is aware that are relevant to the quality of the batch.
The relevance of the above elements is affected by the country of origin of the product,
the manufacturer, and the marketed status of the product (with or without a marketing
authorisation, in the EU or in a third country) and its phase of development. The sponsor
should ensure that the elements taken into account by the qualified person when
certifying the batch are consistent with the information notified pursuant to Article 9(2)
of Directive 2001/20/EC. See also section 44.
41. 	Where investigational medicinal products are manufactured and packaged at different
sites under the supervision of different Qualified Persons, the recommendations listed in
Annex 16 to the GMP Guide should be followed as applicable.
42. 	Where, permitted in accordance with local regulations, packaging or labelling is carried
out at the investigator site by, or under the supervision of a clinical trials pharmacist, or
other health care professional as allowed in those regulations, the Qualified Person is not

-- 13 of 19 --

required to certify the activity in question. The sponsor is nevertheless responsible for
ensuring that the activity is adequately documented and carried out in accordance with
the principles of GMP and should seek the advice of the Qualified Person in this regard.
SHIPPING
43. 	Investigational medicinal products should remain under the control of the sponsor until
after completion of a two-step procedure: certification by the Qualified Person; and
release by the sponsor for use in a clinical trial following fulfillment of the requirements
of Article 9 (Commencement of a clinical trial) of Directive 2001/20/EC. Both steps
should be recorded3 and retained in the relevant trial files held by or on behalf of the
sponsor. The Sponsor should ensure that the details set out in the clinical trial application
and considered by the Qualified Person are consistent with what is finally accepted by
the Competent Authorities. Suitable arrangements to meet this requirement should be
established. 	In practical terms, this can best be achieved through a change control
process for the Product Specification File and defined in a Technical Agreement between
the QP and the Sponsor.
44. 	Shipping of investigational products should be conducted according to instructions given
by or on behalf of the sponsor in the shipping order.
45. 	De-coding arrangements should be available to the appropriate responsible personnel
before investigational medicinal products are shipped to the investigator site.
46. 	A detailed inventory of the shipments made by the manufacturer or importer should be
maintained. It should particularly mention the addressees’ identification.
47. 	Transfers of investigational medicinal products from one trial site to another should
remain 	the 	exception. 	Such 	transfers 	should 	be 	covered 	by 	standard 	operating
procedures. The product history while outside of the control of the manufacturer,
through for example, trial monitoring reports and records of storage conditions at the
original trial site should be reviewed as part of the assessment of the product’s suitability
for transfer and the advice of the Qualified person should be sought. The product should
be returned to the manufacturer, or another authorised manufacturer, for re-labelling, if
necessary, and certification by a Qualified Person. Records should be retained and full
traceability ensured.
COMPLAINTS
48. 	The conclusions of any investigation carried out in relation to a complaint which could
arise from the quality of the product should be discussed between the manufacturer or
importer and the sponsor (if different). This should involve the Qualified Person and
those responsible for the relevant clinical trial in order to assess any potential impact on
the trial, product development and on subjects.
3 A harmonised format for batch certification to facilitate movement between Member States is provided in
attachment 3.

-- 14 of 19 --

RECALLS AND RETURNS
Recalls
49. 	Procedures for retrieving investigational medicinal products and documenting this
retrieval should be agreed by the sponsor, in collaboration with the manufacturer or
importer 	where 	different. 	The 	investigator 	and 	monitor 	need 	to 	understand 	their
obligations under the retrieval procedure.
50. 	The Sponsor should ensure that the supplier of any comparator or other medication to be
used in a clinical trial has a system for communicating to the Sponsor the need to recall
any product supplied.
Returns
51. 	Investigational medicinal products should be returned on agreed conditions defined by
the sponsor, specified in approved written procedures.
52. 	Returned investigational medicinal products should be clearly identified and stored in an
appropriately controlled, dedicated area. Inventory records of the returned medicinal
products should be kept.
DESTRUCTION
53. 	The Sponsor is responsible for the destruction of unused and/or returned investigational
medicinal products. Investigational medicinal products should therefore not be destroyed
without prior written authorisation by the Sponsor.
54. 	The delivered, used and recovered quantities of product should be recorded, reconciled
and verified by or on behalf of the sponsor for each trial site and each trial period.
Destruction of unused investigational medicinal products should be carried out for a
given trial site or a given trial period only after any discrepancies have been investigated
and satisfactorily explained and the reconciliation has been accepted. 	Recording of
destruction operations should be carried out in such a manner that all operations may be
accounted for. The records should be kept by the Sponsor.
55. 	When destruction of investigational medicinal products takes place a dated certificate of,
or receipt for destruction, should be provided to the sponsor. These documents should
clearly identify, or allow traceability to, the batches and/or patient numbers involved and
the actual quantities destroyed.

-- 15 of 19 --

Commission Européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel – Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11
TABLE 1: SUMMARY OF LABELLING DETAILS (§26 TO 30)
a) name, address and telephone number of
the sponsor, contract research organisation
or investigator (the main contact for
information on the product, clinical trial and
emergency unblinding);
GENERAL CASE
For both the primary and secondary
packaging (§26)
(b) pharmaceutical dosage form, route of
administration, quantity of dosage units, and
in the case of open trials, the name/identifier
and strength/potency;
Particulars a4 to k
(c) the batch and/or code number to identify
the contents and packaging operation;
(d) a trial reference code allowing
identification of the trial, site, investigator
and sponsor if not given elsewhere;
PRIMARY PACKAGE
Where primary and secondary packaging
remain together throughout (§29)5
(e) the trial subject identification
number/treatment number and where
relevant, the visit number; a6 b7 c d e
(f) the name of the investigator (if not
included in (a) or (d);
(g) directions for use (reference may be
made to a leaflet or other explanatory
document intended for the trial subject or
person administering the product
PRIMARY PACKAGE
Blisters or small packaging units (§30)5
(h) “for clinical trial use only” or similar
wording; 	a6 b7,8 c d e
(i) the storage conditions;
(j) period of use (use-by date, expiry date or
re-test date as applicable), in month/year
format and in a manner that avoids any
ambiguity.
(k) “keep out of reach of children” except
when the product is for use in trials where
the product is not taken home by subjects.
4 	The address and telephone number of the main contact for information on the product, clinical trial
and for emergency unblinding need not appear on the label where the subject has been given a
leaflet or card which provides these details and has been instructed to keep this in their
possession at all times (§ 27).
5 	When the outer packaging carries the particulars listed in Article 26.
6 	The address and telephone number of the main contact for information on the product, clinical trial
and for emergency unblinding need not be included.
7 	Route of administration may be excluded for oral solid dose forms.
8 	The pharmaceutical dosage form and quantity of dosage units may be omitted.

-- 16 of 19 --

Table 2: BATCH RELEASE OF PRODUCTS
ELEMENTS TO BE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT(3) 	PRODUCT AVAILABLE IN
THE EU
PRODUCT IMPORTED FROM THIRD COUNTRIES
Product
manufactur
ed in EU
without MA
Product with
MA and
available on
EU market
Product
without any
EU MA
Product with
a EU MA
Comparator where documentation
certifying that each batch has been
manufactured in conditions at least
equivalent to those laid down in
Directive 2003/94/EC cannot be
obtained
BEFORE CLINICAL TRIAL PROCESSING
a) Shipping and storage conditions 	Yes
b) All relevant factors (1) showing that each batch has been manufactured and released in
accordance with:
Directive 2003/94/EC, or
GMP standards at least equivalent to those laid down in Directive 2003/94/EC.
Yes
- 	Yes (2)
c) Documentation showing that each batch has been released within the EU according to EU GMP
requirements (see Directive 2001/83/EC, article 51), or documentation showing that the product is
available on the EU market and has been procured in accordance with article 80(b) of Directive
2001/83/EC.
Yes
d) Documentation showing that the product is available on the local market and documentation to
establish confidence in the local regulatory requirements for marketing authorisation and release
for local use. Yes
e) Results of all analysis, tests and checks performed to assess the quality of the imported batch
according to:
the requirements of the MA (see Directive 2001/83/EC, article 51b), or
the Product Specification File, the Order, article 9.2 submission to the regulatory authorities.
Where these analyses and tests are not performed in the EU, this should be justified and the QP
must certify that they have been carried out in accordance with GMP standards at least equivalent
to those laid down in Directive 2003/94/EC.
-
Yes
Yes
Yes
-
Yes
-
Yes
Yes
AFTER CLINICAL TRIAL PROCESSING
f) In addition to the assessment before clinical trial processing, all further relevant factors (1)
showing that each batch has been processed for the purposes of blinding, trial-specific packaging,
labelling and testing in accordance with:
Directive 2003/94/EC, or
GMP standards at least equivalent to those laid down in Directive 2003/94/EC. Yes
- 	Yes (2)
( ) 	f

-- 17 of 19 --

ATTACHMENT 3
[LETTERHEAD OF MANUFACTURER]
Content of the Batch Certificate
Referred to in Art. 13.3 Directive 2001/20/EC
(1) 	Name(s) of product(s)/product identifier(s) as referred to in the clinical trial
application, where applicable.
(2) 	EudraCT No(s) and sponsor protocol code number, when available.
(3) 	Strength
Identity (name) and amount per unit dose for all active substance(s) for each
IMP (including placebo). The manner in which this information is provided
should not unblind the study.
(4) 	Dosage form (pharmaceutical form)
(5) 	Package size (contents of container) and type (e.g. vials, bottles, blisters).
(6) 	Lot/batch number
(7) 	Expiry/retest/use by date
(8) 	Name and address of manufacturer where the Qualified Person issuing the
certificate is located.
(9) 	Manufacturing Authorisation number for the site listed under item 8.
(10) 	Comments/remarks
(11) 	Any additional information considered relevant by the QP.
(12) 	Certification statement.
(13) 	“I hereby certify that this batch complies with the requirements of Article
13.3 of Directive 2001/20/EC “
(14) 	Name of the QP signing the certificate
(15) 	Signature
(16) 	Date of signature
Explanatory Note
Investigational medicinal products may not be used in a clinical trial in a member state of
the European Economic Area until the completion of the two-step procedure referred to
in section 43 of this Annex. The first step is the certification of each batch by the
Qualified Person of the manufacturer or importer that the provisions of Article 13.3(a),

-- 18 of 19 --

19
(b) or (c) of Directive 2001/20/EC have been complied with and documented in
accordance with Art. 13.4 of the same Directive. 	According to Directive 2001/20/EC a
batch of investigational medicinal product shall not have to undergo further checks in
relation to the provisions of article 13.3(a), (b) or (c) of the same directive when it moves
between Member States accompanied by batch certification signed by the Qualified
Person. In order to facilitate the free movement of investigational medicinal products
between Member States the content of these certificates should be in accordance with the
above harmonised format. This format may also be used to certify batches destined for
use within the Member State of the manufacturer or importer.

-- 19 of 19 --

